The Project Gutenberg EBook of Mr. Pickwick's Christmas, by Charles Dickens

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Mr. Pickwick's Christmas
       being an Account of the Pickwickians' Christmas at the
       Manor Farm, of the Adventures There; the Tale of the Goblin
       Who Stole a Sexton, and of the Famous Sports on the Ice

Author: Charles Dickens

Illustrator: George Alfred Williams

Release Date: January 18, 2020 [EBook #61193]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MR. PICKWICK'S CHRISTMAS ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









                        THE WILLIAMS EDITION OF

           _A CHRISTMAS CAROL and THE CRICKET ON THE HEARTH_

                WITH ILLUSTRATIONS IN COLOUR AND LINE BY

                         GEORGE ALFRED WILLIAMS

            A COMPANION VOLUME TO “MR. PICKWICK’S CHRISTMAS”

                                 $2.00

                         THE BAKER & TAYLOR CO.

                           ..._Publishers_...

                33–37 EAST SEVENTEENTH STREET, NEW YORK

[Illustration:

  _As brisk as bees, if not altogether as light as fairies, did the four
    Pickwickians assemble...._
]




                        MR. PICKWICK’S CHRISTMAS

 BEING AN ACCOUNT OF THE PICKWICKIANS’ CHRISTMAS AT THE MANOR FARM, OF
THE ADVENTURES THERE; THE TALE OF THE GOBLIN WHO STOLE A SEXTON, AND OF
                      THE FAMOUS SPORTS ON THE ICE


                   AS WRITTEN IN THE PICKWICK PAPERS
                           BY CHARLES DICKENS

                 WITH ILLUSTRATIONS IN COLOUR AND LINE
                       BY GEORGE ALFRED WILLIAMS

[Illustration]

                       THE BAKER & TAYLOR COMPANY

                               Publishers

           33–37 EAST SEVENTEENTH STREET (UNION SQUARE NORTH)

                                NEW YORK




            _Copyright, 1906, by_ THE BAKER & TAYLOR COMPANY

                       Published, September, 1906

[Illustration]

               _The Plimpton Press Norwood Mass. U.S.A._

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              INTRODUCTION


To begin with nothing and end with something as great as Pickwick is an
achievement given to few men to realise. Yet it seems that in this most
haphazard way Pickwick was created.

At the age of twenty-three Charles Dickens opened his door in Furnival’s
Inn to the managing partner of the firm of “Chapman and Hall.”

The idea then propounded to Dickens was that a monthly publication
should be the vehicle for certain plates to be executed by Robert
Seymour, an admirable humourist-artist of great popularity. These were
to deal with a Nimrod Club and their adventures, fishing, hunting, and
so forth, rendered intensely humorous by exposing the lack of experience
and dexterity of the members. Dickens was requested to contribute a
letter-press to these pictures, but he objected on the grounds that he
was not familiar enough with sports or the sportsman’s life to produce
such material and also because the idea was not fresh. He thought the
results would be much happier if he wrote more freely of the English
people and their customs, and, too, it would be infinitely better were
the plates to be inspired by the text. The suggestions were accepted and
“I then wrote,” says Dickens, “the first number and from the proofsheets
Mr. Seymour made the drawing of the Pickwick Club, producing that happy
portrait of the founder by which he was made a reality.”

In March, 1836, the first monthly number of the “Posthumous Papers of
the Pickwick Club” made its appearance and “... in less than six months
from this time the whole reading world was talking about them; the names
of Winkle, Wardle, Weller, Snodgrass, Dodson, and Fogg had become
familiar in our mouths as household words. ‘Pickwick chintzes’ figured
in linen-drapers’ windows, and ‘Weller corduroys’ in breechesmakers’
advertisements; ‘Boz cabs’ might be seen rattling through the streets,
and the portrait of the author of Pelham and Crichton was scraped down
or pasted over to make room for that of the new popular favourite in the
omnibuses.”

It was only natural that a work so launched, with the author pressed for
copy for each part, should be lacking in any definite form or plot.
Dickens writes in the preface to the original edition:

“The publication of the book in monthly numbers, containing only
thirty-two pages in each, rendered it an object of paramount importance
that, while the different incidents were linked together by a chain of
interest strong enough to prevent their appearing unconnected or
impossible, the general design should be so simple as to sustain no
injury from this detached and desultory form of publication, extending
over no fewer than twenty months. In short, it was necessary—or it
appeared so to the author—that every number should be, to a certain
extent, complete in itself, and yet that the whole twenty numbers, when
collected, should form one tolerably harmonious whole, each leading to
the other by a gentle and not unnatural progress of adventure.

“It is obvious that in a work published with a view to such
considerations, no artfully interwoven or ingeniously complicated plot
can with reason be expected. The author ventures to express a hope that
he has successfully surmounted the difficulties of his undertaking. And
if it be objected to the Pickwick Papers, that they are a mere series of
adventure, in which the scenes are ever changing, and the characters
come and go like the men and women we encounter in the real world, he
can only content himself with the reflection that they claim to be
nothing else, and that the same objection has been made to the works of
some of the greatest novelists in the English language.”

The publishers of the present volume felt that the very manner in which
“Pickwick” was first issued justifies the separate reprinting of those
chapters which deal with the Christmas festivities at the Manor farm.
Aside from this there is an especial interest attached to the Christmas
sentiment contained in these chapters, because it marks the first formal
expression of that Christmas feeling to which Dickens afterwards devoted
a considerable series of delightful works.

It is perfectly natural that Pickwick should be the character to inspire
Dickens to those warm, whole-souled thoughts at a season when our
enthusiasm is always more perceptible. A quotation from a preface
prepared for an edition of his writings, which was designated in the
dedication to John Forster as the best edition of his works, will allow
us to realise the importance of Pickwick as such a vehicle. Dickens
says:

“It has been observed of Mr. Pickwick, that there is a decided change in
his character, as these pages proceed, and that he becomes more good and
more sensible. I do not think this change will appear forced or
unnatural to my readers, if they will reflect that in real life the
peculiarities and oddities of a man who has anything whimsical about him
generally impress us first, and that it is not until we are better
acquainted with him that we usually begin to look below these
superficial traits, and to know the better part of him.”

So here at the Manor Farm we find ourselves joining in those wholesome
sports and human interests that make these Christmas chapters so
contagious. “As brisk as bees, if not altogether as light as fairies,
did the four Pickwickians assemble on the morning of the 22nd of
December.” Who can resist such enthusiasm and not feel the purport of
these lines.

“And numerous indeed are the hearts to which Christmas brings a brief
season of happiness and enjoyment. How many families whose members have
been dispersed and scattered, far and wide, in the restless struggles of
life are then reunited, and meet once again in that happy state of
companionship and mutual good-will, which is a source of such pure and
unalloyed delight and one so incompatible with the cares and sorrows of
the world, that the religious belief of the most civilised nations and
the rude traditions of the roughest savages alike number it among the
first joys of a future condition of existence provided for the blessed
and happy! How many old recollections, and how many dormant sympathies,
does Christmas time awaken!

“We write these words now, many miles distant from the spot at which,
year after year, we met on that day, a merry and joyous circle. Many of
the hearts that throbbed so gaily then have ceased to beat; many of the
looks that shone so brightly then have ceased to glow; the hands we
grasped have grown old; the eyes we sought have hid their lustre in the
grave; and yet the old house, the room, the merry voices and smiling
faces, the jest, the laugh, the most minute and trivial circumstances
connected with those happy meetings, crowd upon our mind at each
recurrence of the season, as if the last assemblage had been but
yesterday! Happy, happy Christmas, that can win us back to the delusions
of our childish days; that can recall to the old man the pleasures of
his youth; and transport the sailor and the traveller, thousands of
miles away, back to his own fireside and quiet home.”

What wonder that the idea to present Pickwick pictorially should appeal
to Robert Seymour and inspire that famous plate, “Pickwick addressing
the Club”! This is a happy portrait and has fixed for all time the
indelible image of its subject upon the world’s mind.

In this matter of pictorial embellishment Dickens’s writings have always
held a unique position. Dickens himself preferred to have his works
appear unadorned by pictures, but the demand made by his public called
into service the most talented pencils from George Cruikshank to
Frederick Barnard. Hence, beside the plates for the original editions,
we have innumerable engravings for subsequent editions and for special
forms of reproduction.

Forster, the biographer of Dickens, informs us that rarely, if ever, did
anything but disappointment await the novelist so far as the
illustrations were concerned; a fact easily determined by tracing the
dissatisfaction he evinced through his intimate and friendly intercourse
with the pictorial interpreters of his text.

The artist of the earlier part of the nineteenth century seldom resorted
to the use of the living model in preparing their pictures, and this in
no small way accounts for the puppet-like appearance of many of their
figures. The only guide was the vivid descriptions of the author, an
artist who drew all his inspiration from life.

However, in the early sixties there arose a new school of illustrators
who lavished the same care upon the preparation of an illustration as a
painter does upon his canvases. The result was a series of pictures
filled with human interest,—pictures not relying upon exaggeration of
details and facial expression to convey their meaning. The only claim
that can be made for the early plates as compared to these later ones is
their charm of association. Work of men such as Frederick Barnard and
Charles Green far surpasses technically these earlier productions and
gives to us an interpretation more human and living.

In the illustration of the original edition of “Pickwick” we are
concerned with three artists, Robert Seymour, Robert Buss, and Hablôt K.
Browne, better known as “Phiz.”

Seymour’s services were prematurely ended by his suicide. His successor,
Buss, was also of short duration and evidently not satisfactory to the
author or publisher, for there follows a long list of applicants
desiring to fill the vacant post, among them Wm. M. Thackeray. In
responding to a toast of “Literature,” at the Royal Academy banquet
years after, the latter said, “I can remember when Mr. Dickens was a
very young man and had commenced delighting the world with some charming
humorous works, of which I cannot mention the name but which were
coloured light green and came out once a month, that this young man
wanted an artist to illustrate his writings, and I recollect walking up
to his chambers with two or three drawings in my hand, which, strange to
say, he did not find suitable. But for that unfortunate blight which
came over my artistical existence it would have been my pride and my
pleasure to have endeavoured one day to find a place on these walls for
one of my performances.” Later he alluded to the rejection of his
services as “Mr. Pickwick’s lucky escape.”

In the end Browne was accepted and of all the illustrators of those
early editions he is the one par excellence, excepting only Luke Fildes
R. A., the illustrator of the first edition of “Edwin Drood.”

When Fildes interviewed Dickens preparatory to taking up this
commission, he informed the author that although he appreciated the
honour of being selected to illustrate “Edwin Drood,” he felt compelled
to forego most reluctantly the pleasure of it if the designs had to be
of a comic and wholly humorous nature after the manner of Phiz and his
predecessors. He reminded Dickens that his writings possessed an
intensely serious as well as a jocular side and would lend themselves
admirably to a graver style of handling. Dickens replied that he was
rather tired of having his illustrators consider him entirely as a
humourist and caricaturist. While there is a vast difference between
“Pickwick” and “Edwin Drood,” yet there is much of serious life depicted
in the various escapades of the club, and it is the keen appreciation of
this quality that seems to have escaped entirely the earlier artists.

We turn to Charles Green and find in his series of large water-colours
one entitled, “The Pickwick Club,” and our intimate friend clothed, not
in caricature, but in all the atmosphere of reality, losing thereby none
of his jovial and comic characteristics. The real Winkle, the real
Snodgrass, the real Tupman, are listening to his address, and the
unnatural elements of the first plates have given way to a more suitable
form of expression though retaining the quaint humour of the text.

Who does not find here the Pickwick we have always sought—the Pickwick
created by Dickens?

The writer has endeavoured to produce in this series of pictures the
true atmosphere, human in the blending of the serious and the comic, and
to give to them the semblance of reality produced in our minds by the
text.

                                                 GEORGE ALFRED WILLIAMS.

 _Chatham, N. J._




                                CONTENTS


                               CHAPTER I

                                                                  PAGE

 _A good-humoured Christmas chapter, containing an account of a
   wedding, and some other sports beside, which although in their
   way, even as good customs as marriage itself, are not quite so
   religiously kept up, in these degenerate times_                  25


                              CHAPTER II

 _The Story of the Goblins who stole a Sexton_                      87


                              CHAPTER III

 _How the Pickwickians made and cultivated the acquaintance of a
   couple of nice young men belonging to one of the liberal
   professions; how they disported themselves on the ice; and how
   their visit came to a conclusion_                               118

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




                             ILLUSTRATIONS


 _As brisk as bees, if not altogether as light as fairies,
   did the four Pickwickians assemble_                      Frontispiece

                                                           _Facing Page_
 _Emily Wardle_                                                       42

 _Then the old church bell rang ... and they all returned
   to breakfast_                                                      56

 _A five and twenty mile walk, undertaken by the males at
   Wardle’s recommendation_                                           64

 _Wardle singing the Christmas Carol_                                 80

 _As he wended his way up the ancient street, he saw the
   cheerful light of the blazing fires_                               90

 _Gabriel started up, and stood rooted to the spot with
   astonishment and terror_                                           96

 _A rich and beautiful landscape was disclosed to view_              110

 “_How slippery it is, Sam!_”                                        130

 _Went slowly and gravely down the slide, with his feet
   about a yard and a quarter apart_                                 138




                   A GOOD-HUMOURED CHRISTMAS CHAPTER


[Illustration]




                               CHAPTER I

  A GOOD-HUMOURED CHRISTMAS CHAPTER, CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF A WEDDING,
      AND SOME OTHER SPORTS BESIDE, WHICH ALTHOUGH IN THEIR WAY, EVEN AS
      GOOD CUSTOMS AS MARRIAGE ITSELF, ARE NOT QUITE SO RELIGIOUSLY KEPT
      UP, IN THESE DEGENERATE TIMES.


As brisk as bees, if not altogether as light as fairies, did the four
Pickwickians assemble on the morning of the twenty-second day of
December, in the year of grace in which these, their faithfully-recorded
adventures, were undertaken and accomplished. Christmas was close at
hand, in all his bluff and hearty honesty; it was the season of
hospitality, merriment, and open-heartedness; the old year was
preparing, like an ancient philosopher, to call his friends around him,
and amidst the sound of feasting and revelry to pass gently and calmly
away. Gay and merry was the time; and right gay and merry were at least
four of the numerous hearts that were gladdened by its coming.

And numerous indeed are the hearts to which Christmas brings a brief
season of happiness and enjoyment. How many families whose members have
been dispersed and scattered far and wide, in the restless struggles of
life, are then reunited, and meet once again in that happy state of
companionship and mutual good-will, which is a source of such pure and
unalloyed delight, and one so incompatible with the cares and sorrows of
the world, that the religious belief of the most civilised nations, and
the rude traditions of the roughest savages, alike number it among the
first joys of a future state of existence, provided for the blest and
happy! How many old recollections, and how many dormant sympathies, does
Christmas time awaken!

We write these words now, many miles distant from the spot at which,
year after year, we met on that day, a merry and joyous circle. Many of
the hearts that throbbed so gaily then, have ceased to beat; many of the
looks that shone so brightly then, have ceased to glow; the hands we
grasped, have grown cold; the eyes we sought, have hid their lustre in
the grave; and yet the old house, the room, the merry voices and smiling
faces, the jest, the laugh, the most minute and trivial circumstance
connected with those happy meetings, crowd upon our mind at each
recurrence of the season, as if the last assemblage had been but
yesterday. Happy, happy Christmas, that can win us back to the delusions
of our childish days, that can recall to the old man the pleasures of
his youth, and transport the sailor and the traveller, thousands of
miles away, back to his own fireside and his quiet home!

But we are so taken up, and occupied, with the good qualities of
Christmas, who, by the way, is quite a country gentleman of the old
school, that we are keeping Mr. Pickwick and his friends waiting in the
cold, on the outside of the Muggleton coach, which they have just
attained, well wrapped up, in great-coats, shawls, and comforters. The
portmanteaus and carpet-bags have been stowed away, and Mr. Weller and
the guard are endeavouring to insinuate into the fore-boot a huge
cod-fish several sizes too large for it, which is snugly packed up, in a
long brown basket, with a layer of straw over the top, and which has
been left to the last, in order that he may repose in safety on the
half-dozen barrels of real native oysters, all the property of Mr.
Pickwick, which have been arranged in regular order, at the bottom of
the receptacle. The interest displayed in Mr. Pickwick’s countenance is
most intense, as Mr. Weller and the guard try to squeeze the cod-fish
into the boot, first head first, and then tail first, and then top
upwards, and then bottom upwards, and then sideways, and then longways,
all of which artifices the implacable cod-fish sturdily resists, until
the guard accidentally hits him in the very middle of the basket,
whereupon he suddenly disappears into the boot, and with him, the head
and shoulders of the guard himself, who, not calculating upon so sudden
a cessation of the passive resistance of the cod-fish, experiences a
very unexpected shock, to the unsmotherable delight of all the porters
and bystanders. Upon this, Mr. Pickwick smiles with great good humour,
and drawing a shilling from his waistcoat pocket, begs the guard, as he
picks himself out of the boot, to drink his health in a glass of hot
brandy and water, at which, the guard smiles too, and Messrs. Snodgrass,
Winkle, and Tupman, all smile in company. The guard and Mr. Weller
disappear for five minutes, most probably to get the hot brandy and
water, for they smell very strongly of it, when they return, the
coachman mounts to the box, Mr. Weller jumps up behind, the Pickwickians
pull their coats round their legs, and their shawls over their noses;
the helpers pull the horse-cloths off, the coachman shouts out a cheery
“All right,” and away they go.

They have rumbled through the streets, and jolted over the stones, and
at length reach the wide and open country. The wheels skim over the hard
and frosty ground; and the horses, bursting into a canter at a smart
crack of the whip, step along the road as if the load behind them,
coach, passengers, cod-fish, oyster barrels, and all, were but a feather
at their heels. They have descended a gentle slope, and enter upon a
level, as compact and dry as a solid block of marble, two miles long.
Another crack of the whip, and on they speed, at a smart gallop, the
horses tossing their heads and rattling the harness as if in
exhilaration at the rapidity of the motion, while the coachman, holding
whip and reins in one hand, takes off his hat with the other, and
resting it on his knees, pulls out his handkerchief, and wipes his
forehead, partly because he has a habit of doing it, and partly because
it’s as well to shew the passengers how cool he is, and what an easy
thing it is to drive four-in-hand, when you have had as much practice as
he has. Having done this very leisurely (otherwise the effect would be
materially impaired), he replaces his handkerchief, pulls on his hat,
adjusts his gloves, squares his elbows, cracks the whip again, and on
they speed, more merrily than before.

A few small houses, scattered on either side of the road, betoken the
entrance to some town or village. The lively notes of the guard’s
key-bugle vibrate in the clear cold air, and wake up the old gentleman
inside, who carefully letting down the window-sash half way, and
standing sentry over the air, takes a short peep out, and then carefully
pulling it up again, informs the other inside that they’re going to
change directly; on which the other inside wakes himself up, and
determines to postpone his next nap until after the stoppage. Again the
bugle sounds lustily forth, and rouses the cottager’s wife and children,
who peep out at the house-door, and watch the coach till it turns the
corner, when they once more crouch round the blazing fire, and throw on
another log of wood against father comes home, while father himself, a
full mile off, has just exchanged a friendly nod with the coachman, and
turned round, to take a good long stare at the vehicle as it whirls
away.

[Illustration]

And now the bugle plays a lively air as the coach rattles through the
ill-paved streets of a country town; and the coachman, undoing the
buckle which keeps his ribands together, prepares to throw them off the
moment he stops. Mr. Pickwick emerges from his coat collar, and looks
about him with great curiosity; perceiving which, the coachman informs
Mr. Pickwick of the name of the town, and tells him it was market-day
yesterday, both which pieces of information Mr. Pickwick retails to his
fellow-passengers, whereupon they emerge from their coat collars too,
and look about them also. Mr. Winkle, who sits at the extreme edge, with
one leg dangling in the air, is nearly precipitated into the street, as
the coach twists round the sharp corner by the cheesemonger’s shop, and
turns into the market-place; and before Mr. Snodgrass, who sits next to
him, has recovered from his alarm, they pull up at the inn yard, where
the fresh horses, with cloths on, are already waiting. The coachman
throws down the reins and gets down himself, and the other outside
passengers drop down also, except those who have no great confidence in
their ability to get up again, and they remain where they are, and stamp
their feet against the coach to warm them; looking with longing eyes and
red noses at the bright fire in the inn bar, and the sprigs of holly
with red berries which ornament the window.

But the guard has delivered at the corn-dealer’s shop, the brown paper
packet he took out of the little pouch which hangs over his shoulder by
a leathern strap, and has seen the horses carefully put to, and has
thrown on the pavement the saddle which was brought from London on the
coach-roof, and has assisted in the conference between the coachman and
the hostler about the grey mare that hurt her off-fore-leg last Tuesday,
and he and Mr. Weller are all right behind, and the coachman is all
right in front, and the old gentleman inside, who has kept the window
down full two inches all this time, has pulled it up again, and the
cloths are off, and they are all ready for starting, except the “two
stout gentlemen,” whom the coachman enquires after with some impatience.
Hereupon the coachman, and the guard, and Sam Weller, and Mr. Winkle,
and Mr. Snodgrass, and all the hostlers, and every one of the idlers,
who are more in number than all the others put together, shout for the
missing gentleman as loud as they can bawl. A distant response is heard
from the yard, and Mr. Pickwick and Mr. Tupman come running down it,
quite out of breath, for they have been having a glass of ale a-piece,
and Mr. Pickwick’s fingers are so cold that he has been full five
minutes before he could find the sixpence to pay for it. The coachman
shouts an admonitory “Now, then, gen’lm’n,” the guard re-echoes it—the
old gentleman inside, thinks it a very extraordinary thing that people
_will_ get down when they know there isn’t time for it—Mr. Pickwick
struggles up on one side, Mr. Tupman on the other, Mr. Winkle cries “All
right,” and off they start. Shawls are pulled up, coat collars are
re-adjusted, the pavement ceases, the houses disappear; and they are
once again dashing along the open road, with the fresh clear air blowing
in their faces, and gladdening their very hearts within them.

[Illustration]

Such was the progress of Mr. Pickwick and his friends by the Muggleton
Telegraph, on their way to Dingley Dell; and at three o’clock that
afternoon, they all stood, high and dry, safe and sound, hale and
hearty, upon the steps of the Blue Lion, having taken on the road quite
enough of ale and brandy, to enable them to bid defiance to the frost
that was binding up the earth in its iron fetters, and weaving its
beautiful net-work upon the trees and hedges. Mr. Pickwick was busily
engaged in counting the barrels of oysters, and superintending the
disinterment of the cod-fish, when he felt himself gently pulled by the
skirts of the coat; and looking round, he discovered that the individual
who resorted to this mode of catching his attention, was no other than
Mr. Wardle’s favourite page, better known to the readers of this
unvarnished history by the distinguishing appellation of the fat boy.

“Aha!” said Mr. Pickwick.

“Aha!” said the fat boy.

And as he said it, he glanced from the cod-fish to the oyster barrels,
and chuckled joyously. He was fatter than ever.

“Well, you look rosy enough, my young friend,” said Mr. Pickwick.

“I’ve been asleep, right in front of the tap-room fire,” replied the fat
boy, who had heated himself to the colour of a new chimney-pot, in the
course of an hour’s nap. “Master sent me over with the chay-cart, to
carry your luggage up to the house. He’d ha’ sent some saddle horses,
but he thought you’d rather walk, being a cold day.”

“Yes, yes,” said Mr. Pickwick, hastily, for he remembered how they had
travelled over nearly the same ground on a previous occasion. “Yes, we
would rather walk. Here, Sam.”

“Sir,” said Mr. Weller.

“Help Mr. Wardle’s servant to put the packages into the cart, and then
ride on with him. We will walk forward at once.”

Having given this direction, and settled with the coachman, Mr. Pickwick
and his three friends struck into the footpath across the fields, and
walked briskly away, leaving Mr. Weller and the fat boy confronted
together for the first time. Sam looked at the fat boy with great
astonishment, but without saying a word; and began to stow the things
rapidly away in the cart, while the fat boy stood quietly by, and seemed
to think it a very interesting sort of thing to see Mr. Weller working
by himself.

“There,” said Sam, throwing in the last carpet bag. “There they are.”

“Yes,” said the fat boy, in a very satisfied tone, “there they are.”

“Vell, young twenty stun,” said Sam, “you’re a nice specimen of a prize
boy, you are.”

“Thankee,” said the fat boy.

“You ain’t got nothin’ on your mind, as makes you fret yourself, have
you?” inquired Sam.

“Not as I knows on,” replied the boy.

“I should rayther ha’ thought, to look at you, that you was a labourin’
under an unrequited attachment to some young ’ooman,” said Sam.

The fat boy shook his head.

“Vell,” said Sam, “I’m glad to hear it. Do you ever drink anythin’?”

“I likes eating, better,” replied the boy.

“Ah,” said Sam, “I should ha’ s’posed that; but what I mean is, should
you like a drop of anythin’ as’d warm you? but I s’pose you never was
cold, with all them elastic fixtures, was you?”

“Sometimes,” replied the boy; “and I likes a drop of something, when
it’s good.”

“Oh, you do, do you?” said Sam, “come this vay, then.”

The Blue Lion tap was soon gained, and the fat boy swallowed a glass of
liquor without so much as winking,—a feat which considerably advanced
him in Mr. Weller’s good opinion. Mr. Weller having transacted a similar
piece of business on his own account, they got into the cart.

“Can you drive?” said the fat boy.

“I should rayther think so,” replied Sam.

“There, then,” said the fat boy, putting the reins in his hand, and
pointing up a lane, “It’s as straight as you can go; you can’t miss it.”

With these words, the fat boy laid himself affectionately down by the
side of the cod-fish, and placing an oyster-barrel under his head for a
pillow, fell asleep instantaneously.

“Vell,” said Sam, “of all the cool boys ever I set my eyes on, this here
young gen’lm’n is about the coolest. Come, vake up, young dropsy.”

But as young dropsy evinced no symptoms of returning animation, Sam
Weller sat himself down in front of the cart, and starting the old horse
with a jerk of the rein, jogged steadily on, towards Manor Farm.

Meanwhile, Mr. Pickwick and his friends having walked their blood into
active circulation, proceeded cheerfully on; the paths were hard, the
grass was crisp and frosty, the air had a fine, dry, bracing coldness,
and the rapid approach of the grey twilight (slate-coloured is a better
term in frosty weather) made them look forward with pleasant
anticipation to the comforts which awaited them at their hospitable
entertainer’s. It was the sort of afternoon that might induce a couple
of elderly gentlemen, in a lonely field, to take off their great coats
and play at leap-frog in pure lightness of heart and gaiety; and we
firmly believe that had Mr. Tupman at that moment proffered “a back,”
Mr. Pickwick would have accepted his offer with the utmost avidity.

However, Mr. Tupman did not volunteer any such personal accommodation,
and the friends walked on, conversing merrily. As they turned into a
lane which they had to cross, the sound of many voices burst upon their
ears; and before they had even had time to form a guess as to whom they
belonged, they walked into the very centre of the party who were
expecting their arrival—a fact which was first notified to the
Pickwickians, by the loud “Hurrah,” which burst from old Wardle’s lips,
when they appeared in sight.

First, there was Wardle himself, looking, if that were possible, more
jolly than ever; then there were Bella and her faithful Trundle; and,
lastly, there were Emily and some eight or ten young ladies, who had all
come down to the wedding which was to take place next day, and were in
as happy and important a state as young ladies usually are, on such
momentous occasions; and they were, one and all, startling the fields
and lanes far and wide with their frolic and laughter.

[Illustration:

  _Emily Wardle._
]

[Illustration]

The ceremony of introduction, under such circumstances, was very soon
performed, or we should rather say that the introduction was soon over,
without any ceremony at all; and in two minutes thereafter, Mr. Pickwick
was joking with the young ladies who wouldn’t come over the stile while
he looked, or who, having pretty feet and unexceptionable ankles,
preferred standing on the top-rail for five minutes or so, and declaring
that they were too frightened to move, with as much ease and absence of
reserve or constraint, as if he had known them for life. It is worthy of
remark too, that Mr. Snodgrass offered Emily far more assistance than
the absolute terrors of the stile (although it was full three feet high,
and had only a couple of stepping-stones) would seem to require; while
one black-eyed young lady in a very nice little pair of boots with fur
round the top, was observed to scream very loudly, when Mr. Winkle
offered to help her over.

All this was very snug and pleasant: and when the difficulties of the
stile were at last surmounted, and they once more entered on the open
field, old Wardle informed Mr. Pickwick how they had all been down in a
body to inspect the furniture and fittings-up of the house, which the
young couple were to tenant, after the Christmas holidays; at which
communication Bella and Trundle both coloured up, as red as the fat boy
after the tap-room fire; and the young lady with the black eyes and the
fur round the boots, whispered something in Emily’s ear, and then
glanced archly at Mr. Snodgrass, to which Emily responded that she was a
foolish girl, but turned very red, notwithstanding; and Mr. Snodgrass,
who was as modest as all great geniuses usually are, felt the crimson
rising to the crown of his head, and devoutly wished, in the inmost
recesses of his own heart, that the young lady aforesaid, with her black
eyes, and her archness, and her boots with the fur round the top, were
all comfortably deposited in the adjacent county.

But if they were social and happy, outside the house, what was the
warmth and cordiality of their reception when they reached the farm! The
very servants grinned with pleasure at sight of Mr. Pickwick: and Emma
bestowed a half-demure, half-impudent, and all pretty look of
recognition on Mr. Tupman, which was enough to make the statue of
Bonaparte in the passage, unfold his arms, and clasp her within them.

The old lady was seated in customary state in the front parlour, but she
was rather cross, and by consequence, most particularly deaf. She never
went out herself, and like a great many other old ladies of the same
stamp, she was apt to consider it an act of domestic treason, if any
body else took the liberty of doing what she couldn’t. So, bless her old
soul, she sat as upright as she could, in her great chair, and looked as
fierce as might be—and that was benevolent after all.

“Mother,” said Wardle, “Mr. Pickwick. You recollect him.”

[Illustration]

“Never mind,” replied the old lady with great dignity. “Don’t trouble
Mr. Pickwick about an old creetur like me. Nobody cares about me now,
and it’s very nat’ral they shouldn’t.” Here the old lady tossed her
head, and smoothed down her lavender-coloured silk dress, with trembling
hands.

“Come, come, Ma’am,” said Mr. Pickwick, “I can’t let you cut an old
friend in this way. I have come down expressly to have a long talk, and
another rubber with you; and we’ll show these boys and girls how to
dance a minuet, before they’re eight-and-forty hours older.”

The old lady was rapidly giving way, but she did not like to do it all
at once; so she only said, “Ah! I can’t hear him.”

“Nonsense, mother,” said Wardle. “Come, come, don’t be cross, there’s a
good soul. Recollect Bella; come, you must keep her spirits up, poor
girl.”

The good old lady heard this, for her lip quivered as her son said it.
But age has its little infirmities of temper, and she was not quite
brought round yet. So, she smoothed down the lavender-coloured dress
again, and turning to Mr. Pickwick said, “Ah, Mr. Pickwick, young people
was very different, when I was a girl.”

“No doubt of that, Ma’am,” said Mr. Pickwick, “and that’s the reason why
I would make much of the few that have any traces of the old stock,”—and
saying this, Mr. Pickwick gently pulled Bella towards him, and bestowing
a kiss upon her forehead, bade her sit down on the little stool at her
grandmother’s feet. Whether the expression of her countenance, as it was
raised towards the old lady’s face, called up a thought of old times, or
whether the old lady was touched by Mr. Pickwick’s affectionate good
nature, or whatever was the cause, she was fairly melted; so, she threw
herself on her grand-daughter’s neck, and all the little ill-humour
evaporated in a gush of silent tears.

A happy party they were, that night. Sedate and solemn were the score of
rubbers in which Mr. Pickwick and the old lady played together; and
uproarious was the mirth of the round table. Long after the ladies had
retired, did the hot elder wine, well qualified with brandy and spice,
go round, and round, and round again; and sound was the sleep, and
pleasant were the dreams that followed. It is a remarkable fact, that
those of Mr. Snodgrass bore constant reference to Emily Wardle; and that
the principal figure in Mr. Winkle’s visions, was a young lady with
black eyes, an arch smile, and a pair of remarkably nice boots, with fur
round the tops.

Mr. Pickwick was awakened early in the morning, by a hum of voices and
pattering of feet, sufficient to rouse even the fat boy from his heavy
slumbers. He sat up in bed, and listened. The female servants and female
visitors were running constantly to and fro; and there were such
multitudinous demands for warm water, such repeated outcries for needles
and thread, and so many half-suppressed entreaties of “Oh, do come and
tie me, there’s a dear,” that Mr. Pickwick in his innocence began to
imagine that something dreadful must have occurred, when he grew more
awake, and remembered the wedding. The occasion being an important one,
he dressed himself with peculiar care, and descended to the breakfast
room.

There were all the female servants in a bran new uniform of pink muslin
gowns with white bows in their caps, running about the house in a state
of excitement and agitation, which it would be impossible to describe.
The old lady was dressed out, in a brocaded gown, which had not seen the
light for twenty years, saving and excepting such truant rays as had
stolen through the chinks in the box in which it had been laid by,
during the whole time. Mr. Trundle was in high feather and spirits, but
a little nervous withal. The hearty old landlord was trying to look very
cheerful and unconcerned, but failing signally in the attempt. All the
girls were in tears and white muslin, except a select two or three, who
were being honoured with a private view of the bride and bridesmaids, up
stairs. All the Pickwickians were in most blooming array; and there was
a terrific roaring on the grass in front of the house, occasioned by all
the men, boys, and hobbledehoys attached to the farm, each of whom had
got a white bow in his buttonhole, and all of whom were cheering with
might and main: being incited thereto, and stimulated therein, by the
precept and example of Mr. Samuel Weller, who had managed to become
mighty popular already, and was as much at home as if he had been born
on the land.

A wedding is a licensed subject to joke upon, but there really is no
great joke in the matter after all; we speak merely of the ceremony, and
beg it to be distinctly understood that we indulge in no hidden sarcasm
upon a married life. Mixed up with the pleasure and joy of the occasion,
are the many regrets at quitting home, the tears of parting between
parent and child, the consciousness of leaving the dearest and kindest
friends of the happiest portion of human life, to encounter its cares
and troubles with others still untried, and little known—natural
feelings which we would not render this chapter mournful by describing,
and which we should be still more unwilling to be supposed to ridicule.

Let us briefly say, then, that the ceremony was performed by the old
clergyman, in the parish church of Dingley Dell, and that Mr. Pickwick’s
name is attached to the register, still preserved in the vestry thereof;
that the young lady with the black eyes signed her name in a very
unsteady and tremulous manner; and that Emily’s signature, as the other
bridesmaid, is nearly illegible; that it all went off in very admirable
style; that the young ladies generally, thought it far less shocking
than they expected; and that although the owner of the black eyes and
the arch smile informed Mr. Winkle that she was sure she could never
submit to anything so dreadful, we have the very best reasons for
thinking she was mistaken. To all this, we may add, that Mr. Pickwick
was the first who saluted the bride: and that in so doing, he threw over
her neck, a rich gold watch and chain, which no mortal eyes but the
jeweller’s had ever beheld before. Then the old church bell rang as
gaily as it could, and they all returned to breakfast.

“Vere does the mince-pies go, young opium eater?” said Mr. Weller to the
fat boy, as he assisted in laying out such articles of consumption as
had not been duly arranged on the previous night.

The fat boy pointed to the destination of the pies.

“Wery good,” said Sam, “stick a bit o’ Christmas in ’em. T’other dish
opposite. There; now ve look compact and comfortable, as the father said
ven he cut his little boy’s head off, to cure him o’ squintin’.”

As Mr. Weller made the comparison, he fell back a step or two, to give
full effect to it, and surveyed the preparations with the utmost
satisfaction.

“Wardle,” said Mr. Pickwick, almost as soon as they were all seated, “a
glass of wine, in honour of this happy occasion!”

“I shall be delighted, my boy,” said Wardle. “Joe—damn that boy, he’s
gone to sleep.”

“No, I ain’t, Sir,” replied the fat boy, starting up from a remote
corner, where, like the patron saint of fat boys—the immortal Horner—he
had been devouring a Christmas pie, though not with the coolness and
deliberation which characterised that young gentleman’s proceedings.

“Fill Mr. Pickwick’s glass.”

“Yes, sir.”

The fat boy filled Mr. Pickwick’s glass, and then retired behind his
master’s chair, from whence he watched the play of the knives and forks,
and the progress of the choice morsels, from the dishes, to the mouths
of the company, with a kind of dark and gloomy joy that was most
impressive.

“God bless you, old fellow,” said Mr. Pickwick.

“Same to you, my boy,” replied Wardle; and they pledged each other,
heartily.

“Mrs. Wardle,” said Mr. Pickwick, “we old folks must have a glass of
wine together, in honour of this joyful event.”

[Illustration:

  _Then the old church bell rang ... and they all returned to
    breakfast._
]

The old lady was in a state of great grandeur just then, for she was
sitting at the top of the table in her brocaded gown, with her
newly-married grand-daughter on one side, and Mr. Pickwick on the other,
to do the carving. Mr. Pickwick had not spoken in a very loud tone, but
she understood him at once, and drank off a full glass of wine to his
long life and happiness; after which the worthy old soul launched forth
into a minute and particular account of her own wedding, with a
dissertation on the fashion of wearing high-heeled shoes, and some
particulars concerning the life and adventures of the beautiful Lady
Tollimglower, deceased, at all of which the old lady herself laughed
very heartily indeed, and so did the young ladies too, for they were
wondering among themselves what on earth grandma was talking about. When
they laughed, the old lady laughed ten times more heartily: and said
that they always had been considered capital stories, which caused them
all to laugh again, and put the old lady into the very best of humours.
Then the cake was cut, and passed through the ring; and the young ladies
saved pieces to put under their pillows to dream of their future
husbands on; and a great deal of blushing and merriment was thereby
occasioned.

“Mr. Miller,” said Mr. Pickwick to his old acquaintance, the hard-headed
gentleman, “a glass of wine?”

“With great satisfaction Mr. Pickwick,” replied the hard-headed
gentleman, solemnly.

“You’ll take me in?” said the benevolent old clergyman.

“And me,” interposed his wife.

“And me, and me,” said a couple of poor relations at the bottom of the
table, who had eaten and drank very heartily, and laughed at every
thing.

Mr. Pickwick expressed his heartfelt delight at every additional
suggestion; and his eyes beamed with hilarity and cheerfulness.

“Ladies and gentlemen,” said Mr. Pickwick, suddenly rising—

“Hear, hear! Hear, hear! Hear, hear!” said Mr. Weller, in the excitement
of his feelings.

“Call in all the servants,” cried old Wardle, interposing to prevent the
public rebuke which Mr. Weller would otherwise most indubitably have
received from his master. “Give them a glass of wine each, to drink the
toast in. Now, Pickwick.”

Amidst the silence of the company, the whispering of the women servants,
and the awkward embarrassment of the men, Mr. Pickwick proceeded.

“Ladies and gentlemen—no, I won’t say ladies and gentlemen, I’ll call
you my friends, my dear friends, if the ladies will allow me to take so
great a liberty”—

Here Mr. Pickwick was interrupted by immense applause from the ladies,
echoed by the gentlemen, during which the owner of the eyes was
distinctly heard to state that she could kiss that dear Mr. Pickwick,
whereupon Mr. Winkle gallantly inquired if it couldn’t be done by
deputy, to which the young lady with the black eyes replied, “Go
away”—and accompanied the request with a look which said as plainly as a
look could do—“if you can.”

“My dear friends,” resumed Mr. Pickwick, “I am going to propose the
health of the bride and bridegroom—God bless ’em (cheers and tears). My
young friend Trundle, I believe to be a very excellent and manly fellow;
and his wife I know to be a very amiable and lovely girl, well qualified
to transfer to another sphere of action the happiness which for twenty
years she has diffused around her, in her father’s house. (Here, the fat
boy burst forth into stentorian blubberings, and was led forth by the
coat collar, by Mr. Weller.) I wish,” added Mr. Pickwick, “I wish I was
young enough to be her sister’s husband, (cheers), but, failing that, I
am happy to be old enough to be her father; for, being so, I shall not
be suspected of any latent designs when I say, that I admire, esteem,
and love them both (cheers and sobs). The bride’s father, our good
friend there, is a noble person, and I am proud to know him (great
uproar). He is a kind, excellent, independent-spirited, fine-hearted,
hospitable, liberal man (enthusiastic shouts from the poor relations, at
all the adjectives; and especially at the last two). That his daughter
may enjoy all the happiness, even he can desire; and that he may derive
from the contemplation of her felicity all the gratification of heart
and peace of mind which he so well deserves, is, I am persuaded, our
united wish. So, let us drink their healths, and wish them prolonged
life, and every blessing.”

Mr. Pickwick concluded amidst a whirlwind of applause; and once more
were the lungs of the supernumeraries, under Mr. Weller’s command,
brought into active and efficient operation. Mr. Wardle proposed Mr.
Pickwick; and Mr. Pickwick proposed the old lady. Mr. Snodgrass proposed
Mr. Wardle, and Mr. Wardle proposed Mr. Snodgrass. One of the poor
relations proposed Mr. Tupman, and the other poor relation proposed Mr.
Winkle; and all was happiness and festivity, until the mysterious
disappearance of both the poor relations beneath the table, warned the
party that it was time to adjourn.

At dinner they met again, after a five and twenty mile walk, undertaken
by the males at Wardle’s recommendation, to get rid of the effects of
the wine at breakfast; the poor relations had lain in bed all day, with
the view of attaining the same happy consummation, but, as they had been
unsuccessful, they stopped there. Mr. Weller kept the domestics in a
state of perpetual hilarity; and the fat boy divided his time into small
alternate allotments of eating and sleeping.

The dinner was as hearty an affair as the breakfast, and was quite as
noisy, without the tears. Then came the dessert and some more toasts.
Then came the tea and coffee; and then, the ball.

[Illustration:

  _A five and twenty mile walk, undertaken by the males at Wardle’s
    recommendation._
]

The best sitting room at Manor Farm was a good, long, dark pannelled
room with a high chimney piece, and a capacious chimney, up which you
could have driven one of the new patent cabs, wheels and all. At the
upper end of the room, seated in a shady bower of holly and evergreens,
were the two best fiddlers, and the only harp, in all Muggleton. In all
sorts of recesses, and on all kinds of brackets, stood massive old
silver candlesticks with four branches each. The carpet was up, the
candles burnt bright, the fire blazed and crackled on the hearth; and
merry voices and light-hearted laughter rang through the room. If any of
the old English yeomen had turned into fairies when they died, it was
just the place in which they would have held their revels.

If any thing could have added to the interest of this agreeable scene,
it would have been the remarkable fact of Mr. Pickwick’s appearing
without his gaiters, for the first time within the memory of his oldest
friends.

“You mean to dance?” said Wardle.

“Of course I do,” replied Mr. Pickwick, “Don’t you see I am dressed for
the purpose?” and Mr. Pickwick called attention to his speckled silk
stockings, and smartly tied pumps.

“_You_ in silk stockings!” exclaimed Mr. Tupman, jocosely.

“And why not Sir—why not?” said Mr. Pickwick, turning warmly upon him.

“Oh, of course there is no reason why you shouldn’t wear them,”
responded Mr. Tupman.

“I imagine not Sir—I imagine not,” said Mr. Pickwick in a very
peremptory tone.

Mr. Tupman had contemplated a laugh, but he found it was a serious
matter; so he looked grave, and said they were a very pretty pattern.

“I hope they are,” said Mr. Pickwick fixing his eyes upon his friend.
“You see nothing extraordinary in these stockings, _as_ stockings, I
trust Sir?”

“Certainly not—oh certainly not,” replied Mr. Tupman. He walked away;
and Mr. Pickwick’s countenance resumed its customary benign expression.

“We are all ready, I believe,” said Mr. Pickwick, who was stationed with
the old lady at the top of the dance, and had already made four false
starts, in his excessive anxiety to commence.

“Then begin at once,” said Wardle. “Now.”

Up struck the two fiddles and the one harp, and off went Mr. Pickwick
into hands across, when there was a general clapping of hands, and a cry
of “Stop, stop.”

“What’s the matter?” said Mr. Pickwick, who was only brought to, by the
fiddles and harp desisting, and could have been stopped by no other
earthly power, if the house had been on fire.

“Where’s Arabella Allen?” said a dozen voices.

“And Winkle!” added Mr. Tupman.

“Here we are!” exclaimed that gentleman, emerging with his pretty
companion from the corner; and, as he did so, it would have been hard to
tell which was the redder in the face, he or the young lady with the
black eyes.

“What an extraordinary thing it is, Winkle,” said Mr. Pickwick, rather
pettishly, “that you couldn’t have taken your place before.”

“Not at all extraordinary,” said Mr. Winkle.

“Well,” said Mr. Pickwick, with a very expressive smile, as his eyes
rested on Arabella, “well, I don’t know that it _was_ extraordinary,
either, after all.”

However, there was no time to think more about the matter, for the
fiddles and harp began in real earnest. Away went Mr. Pickwick—hands
across, down the middle to the very end of the room, and half way up the
chimney, back again to the door—poussette everywhere—loud stamp on the
ground—ready for the next couple—off again—all the figure over once
more—another stamp to beat out the time—next couple, and the next, and
the next again—never was such going; and at last, after they had reached
the bottom of the dance, and full fourteen couple after the old lady had
retired in an exhausted state, and the clergyman’s wife had been
substituted in her stead, did that gentleman, when there was no demand
whatever on his exertions, keep perpetually dancing in his place, to
keep time to the music, smiling on his partner all the while with a
blandness of demeanour which baffles all description.

Long before Mr. Pickwick was weary of dancing, the newly-married couple
had retired from the scene. There was a glorious supper down stairs,
notwithstanding, and a good long sitting after it; and when Mr. Pickwick
awoke, late the next morning, he had a confused recollection of having,
severally and confidentially, invited somewhere about five-and-forty
people to dine with him at the George and Vulture, the very first time
they came to London; which Mr. Pickwick rightly considered a pretty
certain indication of his having taken something besides exercise, on
the previous night.

“And so your family has games in the kitchen to-night, my dear, has
they?” inquired Sam of Emma.

“Yes, Mr. Weller,” replied Emma; “we always have on Christmas eve.
Master wouldn’t neglect to keep it up on any account.”

“Your master’s a wery pretty notion of keepin’ anythin’ up, my dear,”
said Mr. Weller; “I never see such a sensible sort of man as he is, or
such a reg’lar gen’l’m’n.”

“Oh, that he is!” said the fat boy, joining in the conversation; “don’t
he breed nice pork!” and the fat youth gave a semi-cannibalic leer at
Mr. Weller, as he thought of the roast legs and gravy.

“Oh, you’ve woke up, at last, have you?” said Sam.

The fat boy nodded.

“I’ll tell you what it is, young boa constructer,” said Mr. Weller,
impressively, “if you don’t sleep a little less, and exercise a little
more, ven you comes to be a man you’ll lay yourself open to the same
sort o’ personal inconwenience as was inflicted on the old gen’lm’n as
wore the pig-tail.”

“What did they do to him?” inquired the fat boy, in a faltering voice.

“I’m a goin’ to tell you,” replied Mr. Weller; “he was one o’ the
largest patterns as was ever turned out—reg’lar fat man, as hadn’t
caught a glimpse of his own shoes for five-and-forty years.”

“Lor!” exclaimed Emma.

“No, that he hadn’t, my dear,” said Mr. Weller, “and if you’d put an
exact model of his own legs on the dinin’ table afore him, he wouldn’t
ha’ known ’em. Well, he always walks to his office with a wery handsome
gold watch-chain hanging out, about a foot and a half; and a gold watch
in his fob pocket as was worth—I’m afraid to say how much, but as much
as a watch can be—a large, heavy, round manufacturer, as stout for a
watch, as he was for a man, and with a big face in proportion. ‘You’d
better not carry that ’ere watch,’ says the old gen’l’m’n’s friends,
‘you’ll be robbed on it,’ says they. ‘Shall I?’ says he. ‘Yes, will
you,’ says they. ‘Vell,’ says he, ‘I should like to see the thief as
could get this here watch out, for I’m blessed if _I_ ever can; it’s
such a tight fit,’ says he, ‘and venever I vants to know what’s o’clock,
I’m obliged to stare into the bakers’ shops,’ he says. Well, then he
laughs as hearty as if he was a goin’ to pieces, and out he walks agin’
with his powdered head and pig-tail, and rolls down the Strand vith the
chain hangin’ out furder than ever, and the great round watch almost
bustin’ through his grey kersey smalls. There warn’t a pickpocket in all
London as didn’t take a pull at that chain, but the chain ’ud never
break, and the watch ’ud never come out, so they soon got tired o’
dragging such a heavy old gen’l’m’n along the pavement, and he’d go home
and laugh till the pig-tail wibrated like the penderlum of a Dutch
clock. At last, one day the old gen’l’m’n was a rollin’ along, and he
sees a pickpocket as he know’d by sight, a-comin’ up, arm in arm vith a
little boy vith a wery large head. ‘Here’s a game,’ says the old
gen’l’m’n to himself, ‘they’re a goin’ to have another try, but it won’t
do.’ So he begins a chucklin’ wery hearty, ven, all of a sudden, the
little boy leaves hold of the pickpocket’s arm, and rushes headforemost
straight into the old gen’l’m’n’s stomach, and for a moment doubled him
right up vith the pain. ‘Murder!’ says the old gen’l’m’n. ‘All right,
Sir,’ says the pickpocket, a whisperin’ in his ear. And ven he come
straight agin’, the watch and chain was gone, and what’s worse than
that, the old gen’l’m’n’s digestion was all wrong ever artervards, to
the wery last day of his life; so just you look about you, young feller,
and take care you don’t get too fat.”

As Mr. Weller concluded this moral tale, with which the fat boy appeared
much affected, they all three wended their way to the large kitchen, in
which the family were by this time assembled, according to annual custom
on Christmas eve, observed by old Wardle’s forefathers from time
immemorial.

From the centre of the ceiling of this kitchen, old Wardle had just
suspended with his own hands a huge branch of mistletoe, and this same
branch of mistletoe instantaneously gave rise to a scene of general and
most delightful struggling and confusion; in the midst of which Mr.
Pickwick with a gallantry which would have done honour to a descendant
of Lady Tollimglower herself, took the old lady by the hand, led her
beneath the mystic branch, and saluted her in all courtesy and decorum.
The old lady submitted to this piece of practical politeness with all
the dignity which befitted so important and serious a solemnity, but the
younger ladies not being so thoroughly imbued with a superstitious
veneration of the custom, or imagining that the value of a salute is
very much enhanced if it cost a little trouble to obtain it, screamed
and struggled, and ran into corners, and threatened and remonstrated,
and did every thing but leave the room, until some of the less
adventurous gentlemen were on the point of desisting, when they all at
once found it useless to resist any longer, and submitted to be kissed
with a good grace. Mr. Winkle kissed the young lady with the black eyes,
and Mr. Snodgrass kissed Emily; and Mr. Weller, not being particular
about the form of being under the mistletoe, kissed Emma and the other
female servants, just as he caught them. As to the poor relations, they
kissed everybody, not even excepting the plainer portion of the
young-lady visitors, who, in their excessive confusion, ran right under
the mistletoe, directly it was hung up, without knowing it! Wardle stood
with his back to the fire, surveying the whole scene, with the utmost
satisfaction; and the fat boy took the opportunity of appropriating to
his own use, and summarily devouring, a particularly fine mince pie,
that had been carefully put by, for somebody else.

Now the screaming had subsided, and faces were in a glow and curls in a
tangle, and Mr. Pickwick, after kissing the old lady as
before-mentioned, was standing under the mistletoe, looking with a very
pleased countenance on all that was passing around him, when the young
lady with the black eyes, after a little whispering with the other young
ladies, made a sudden dart forward, and, putting her arm round Mr.
Pickwick’s neck, saluted him affectionately on the left cheek; and
before Mr. Pickwick distinctly knew what was the matter, he was
surrounded by the whole body, and kissed by every one of them.

It was a pleasant thing to see Mr. Pickwick in the centre of the group,
now pulled this way, and then that, and first kissed on the chin and
then on the nose, and then on the spectacles, and to hear the peals of
laughter which were raised on every side; but it was a still more
pleasant thing to see Mr. Pickwick, blinded shortly afterwards, with a
silk-handkerchief, falling up against the wall, and scrambling into
corners, and going through all the mysteries of blind-man’s buff, with
the utmost relish for the game, until at last he caught one of the poor
relations; and then had to evade the blind-man himself, which he did
with a nimbleness and agility that elicited the admiration and applause
of all beholders. The poor relations caught just the people whom they
thought would like it; and when the game flagged, got caught themselves.
When they were all tired of blind-man’s buff, there was a great game at
snapdragon, and when fingers enough were burned with that, and all the
raisins gone, they sat down by the huge fire of blazing logs to a
substantial supper, and a mighty bowl of wassail, something smaller than
an ordinary wash-house copper, in which the hot apples were hissing and
bubbling with a rich look, and a jolly sound, that were perfectly
irresistible.

“This,” said Mr. Pickwick, looking round him, “this is, indeed,
comfort.”

“Our invariable custom,” replied Mr. Wardle. “Everybody sits down with
us on Christmas eve, as you see them now—servants and all; and here we
wait till the clock strikes twelve, to usher Christmas in, and wile away
the time with forfeits and old stories. Trundle, my boy, rake up the
fire.”

Up flew the bright sparks in myriads as the logs were stirred, and the
deep red blaze sent forth a rich glow, that penetrated into the furthest
corner of the room, and cast its cheerful tint on every face.

“Come,” said Wardle, “a song—a Christmas song. I’ll give you one, in
default of a better.”

“Bravo,” said Mr. Pickwick.

“Fill up,” cried Wardle. “It will be two hours good, before you see the
bottom of the bowl through the deep rich colour of the wassail; fill up
all round, and now for the song.”

Thus saying, the merry old gentleman, in a good, round, sturdy voice,
commenced without more ado—


                           A CHRISTMAS CAROL

          I care not for Spring; on his fickle wing
          Let the blossoms and buds be borne:
          He woos them amain with his treacherous rain,
          And he scatters them ere the morn.
          An inconstant elf, he knows not himself,
          Or his own changing mind an hour,
          He’ll smile in your face, and, with wry grimace,
          He’ll wither your youngest flower.

          Let the Summer sun to his bright home run,
          He shall never be sought by me;
          When he’s dimmed by a cloud I can laugh aloud,
          And care not how sulky he be;
          For his darling child is the madness wild
          That sports in fierce fever’s train;
          And when love is too strong, it don’t last long,
          As many have found to their pain.

          A mild harvest night, by the tranquil light
          Of the modest and gentle moon,
          Has a far sweeter sheen for me, I ween,
          Than the broad and unblushing noon.
          But every leaf awakens my grief,
          As it lieth beneath the tree;
          So let Autumn air be never so fair,
          It by no means agrees with me.

          But my song I troll out, for CHRISTMAS stout,
          The hearty, the true, and the bold;
          A bumper I drain, and with might and main
          Give three cheers for this Christmas old.
          We’ll usher him in with a merry din
          That shall gladden his joyous heart,
          And we’ll keep him up while there’s bite or sup,
          And in fellowship good, we’ll part.

          In his fine honest pride, he scorns to hide
          One jot of his hard-weather scars;
          They’re no disgrace, for there’s much the same trace
          On the cheeks of our bravest tars.
          Then again I sing ’till the roof doth ring,
          And it echoes from wall to wall—
          To the stout old wight, fair welcome to-night,
          As the King of the Seasons all!

[Illustration:

  But my song I troll out, for CHRISTMAS stout,
  The hearty, the true, and the bold;
  A bumper I drain, and with might and main
  Give three cheers for this Christmas old.
  We’ll usher him in with a merry din
  That shall gladden his joyous heart,
  And we’ll keep him up while there’s bite or sup,
  And in fellowship good, we’ll part.
]

This song was tumultuously applauded, for friends and dependents make a
capital audience; and the poor relations especially were in perfect
extasies of rapture. Again was the fire replenished, and again went the
wassail round.

“How it snows!” said one of the men, in a low tone.

“Snows, does it?” said Wardle.

“Rough, cold night, Sir,” replied the man; “and there’s a wind got up
that drifts it across the fields, in a thick white cloud.”

“What does Jem say?” inquired the old lady. “There ain’t any thing the
matter, is there?”

“No, no, mother,” replied Wardle; “he says there’s a snow-drift, and a
wind that’s piercing cold. I should know that, by the way it rumbles in
the chimney.”

“Ah!” said the old lady, “there was just such a wind, and just such a
fall of snow, a good many years back, I recollect—just five years before
your poor father died. It was a Christmas eve, too; and I remember that
on that very night he told us the story about the goblins that carried
away old Gabriel Grub.”

“The story about what?” said Mr. Pickwick.

“Oh, nothing—nothing,” replied Wardle. “About an old sexton, that the
good people down here suppose to have been carried away by goblins.”

“Suppose!” ejaculated the old lady. “Is there any body hardy enough to
disbelieve it? Suppose! Haven’t you heard ever since you were a child,
that he _was_ carried away by the goblins, and don’t you know he was?”

“Very well, mother, he was, if you like,” said Wardle, laughing. “He
_was_ carried away by goblins, Pickwick; and there’s an end of the
matter.”

“No, no,” said Mr. Pickwick, “not an end of it, I assure you; for I must
hear how, and why, and all about it.”

Wardle smiled, as every head was bent forward to hear; and filling out
the wassail with no stinted hand, nodded a health to Mr. Pickwick, and
began as follows—

But bless our editorial heart, what a long chapter we have been betrayed
into! We had quite forgotten all such petty restrictions as chapters, we
solemnly declare. So here goes, to give the goblin a fair start in a new
one. A clear stage and no favour for the goblins, ladies and gentlemen,
if you please.

[Illustration]




                               CHAPTER II

  THE STORY OF THE GOBLINS WHO STOLE A SEXTON


[Illustration]

“In an old abbey town, down in this part of the country, a long, long
while ago—so long, that the story must be a true one, because our great
grandfathers implicitly believed it—there officiated as sexton and
grave-digger in the church-yard, one Gabriel Grub. It by no means
follows that because a man is a sexton, and constantly surrounded by
emblems of mortality, therefore he should be a morose and melancholy
man; your undertakers are the merriest fellows in the world, and I once
had the honour of being on intimate terms with a mute, who in private
life, and off duty, was as comical and jocose a little fellow as ever
chirped out a devil-may-care song, without a hitch in his memory, or
drained off a good stiff glass of grog without stopping for breath. But
notwithstanding these precedents to the contrary, Gabriel Grub was an
ill-conditioned, cross-grained, surly fellow—a morose and lonely man,
who consorted with nobody but himself, and an old wicker bottle which
fitted into his large deep waistcoat pocket; and who eyed each merry
face as it passed him by, with such a deep scowl of malice and
ill-humour, as it was difficult to meet without feeling something the
worse for.

“A little before twilight one Christmas Eve, Gabriel shouldered his
spade, lighted his lantern, and betook himself towards the old
church-yard, for he had got a grave to finish by next morning, and
feeling very low he thought it might raise his spirits perhaps, if he
went on with his work at once. As he wended his way up the ancient
street, he saw the cheerful light of the blazing fires gleam through the
old casements, and heard the loud laugh and the cheerful shouts of those
who were assembled around them; he marked the bustling preparations for
next day’s good cheer, and smelt the numerous savoury odours consequent
thereupon, as they steamed up from the kitchen windows in clouds. All
this was gall and wormwood to the heart of Gabriel Grub; and as groups
of children bounded out of the houses, tripped across the road, and were
met, before they could knock at the opposite door, by half a dozen
curly-headed little rascals who crowded round them as they flocked up
stairs to spend the evening in their Christmas games, Gabriel smiled
grimly, and clutched the handle of his spade with a firmer grasp, as he
thought of measles, scarlet-fever, thrush, hooping-cough, and a good
many other sources of consolation beside.

“In this happy frame of mind, Gabriel strode along, returning a short,
sullen growl to the good-humoured greetings of such of his neighbours as
now and then passed him, until he turned into the dark lane which led to
the church-yard. Now Gabriel had been looking forward to reaching the
dark lane, because it was, generally speaking, a nice gloomy mournful
place, into which the towns-people did not much care to go, except in
broad daylight, and when the sun was shining; consequently he was not a
little indignant to hear a young urchin roaring out some jolly song
about a merry Christmas, in this very sanctuary, which had been called
Coffin Lane ever since the days of the old abbey, and the time of the
shaven-headed monks. As Gabriel walked on, and the voice drew nearer, he
found it proceeded from a small boy, who was hurrying along, to join one
of the little parties in the old street, and who, partly to keep himself
company, and partly to prepare himself for the occasion, was shouting
out the song at the highest pitch of his lungs. So Gabriel waited till
the boy came up, and then dodged him into a corner, and rapped him over
the head with his lantern five or six times, just to teach him to
modulate his voice. And as the boy hurried away with his hand to his
head, singing quite a different sort of tune, Gabriel Grub chuckled very
heartily to himself, and entered the church-yard, locking the gate
behind him.

[Illustration:

  _As he wended his way up the ancient street he saw the cheerful light
    of the blazing fires._
]

“He took off his coat, set down his lantern, and getting into the
unfinished grave, worked at it for an hour or so, with right good-will.
But the earth was hardened with the frost, and it was no very easy
matter to break it up, and shovel it out; and although there was a moon,
it was a very young one, and shed little light upon the grave, which was
in the shadow of the church. At any other time, these obstacles would
have made Gabriel Grub very moody and miserable, but he was so well
pleased with having stopped the small boy’s singing, that he took little
heed of the scanty progress he had made, and looked down into the grave
when he had finished work for the night, with grim satisfaction,
murmuring as he gathered up his things—

            Brave lodgings for one, brave lodgings for one,
            A few feet of cold earth, when life is done;
            A stone at the head, a stone at the feet,
            A rich, juicy meal for the worms to eat;
            Rank grass over head, and damp clay around,
            Brave lodgings for one, these, in holy ground!

“‘Ho! ho!’ laughed Gabriel Grub, as he sat himself down on a flat
tombstone which was a favourite resting place of his and drew forth his
wicker bottle. ‘A coffin at Christmas—a Christmas Box. Ho! ho! ho!’

“‘Ho! ho! ho!’ repeated a voice which sounded close behind him.

“Gabriel paused in some alarm, in the act of raising the wicker bottle
to his lips, and looked round. The bottom of the oldest grave about him,
was not more still and quiet, than the church-yard in the pale
moonlight. The cold hoar frost glistened on the tombstones, and sparkled
like rows of gems among the stone carvings of the old church. The snow
lay hard and crisp upon the ground, and spread over the thickly-strewn
mounds of earth, so white and smooth a cover, that it seemed as if
corpses lay there, hidden only by their winding sheets. Not the faintest
rustle broke the profound tranquillity of the solemn scene. Sound itself
appeared to be frozen up, all was so cold and still.

“‘It was the echoes,’ said Gabriel Grub, raising the bottle to his lips
again.

“‘It was _not_,’ said a deep voice.

“Gabriel started up, and stood rooted to the spot with astonishment and
terror; for his eyes rested on a form which made his blood run cold.

“Seated on an upright tombstone, close to him, was a strange unearthly
figure, whom Gabriel felt at once, was no being of this world. His long
fantastic legs which might have reached the ground, were cocked up, and
crossed after a quaint, fantastic fashion; his sinewy arms were bare,
and his hands rested on his knees. On his short round body he wore a
close covering, ornamented with small slashes; and a short cloak dangled
at his back; the collar was cut into curious peaks, which served the
goblin in lieu of ruff or neckerchief; and his shoes curled up at the
toes into long points. On his head he wore a broad-brimmed sugar loaf
hat, garnished with a single feather. The hat was covered with the white
frost, and the goblin looked as if he had sat on the same tombstone very
comfortably, for two or three hundred years. He was sitting perfectly
still; his tongue was put out, as if in derision; and he was grinning at
Gabriel Grub with such a grin as only a goblin could call up.

“‘It was _not_ the echoes,’ said the goblin.

“Gabriel Grub was paralysed, and could make no reply.

“‘What do you do here on Christmas eve?’ said the goblin, sternly.

“‘I came to dig a grave Sir,’ stammered Gabriel Grub.

[Illustration:

  _Gabriel started up, and stood rooted to the spot with astonishment
    and terror._
]

“‘What man wanders among graves and church-yards on such a night as
this?’ said the goblin.

“‘Gabriel Grub! Gabriel Grub!’ screamed a wild chorus of voices that
seemed to fill the church-yard. Gabriel looked fearfully round—nothing
was to be seen.

“‘What have you got in that bottle?’ said the goblin.

“‘Hollands, Sir,’ replied the sexton, trembling more than ever; for he
had bought it of the smugglers, and he thought that perhaps his
questioner might be in the excise department of the goblins.

“‘Who drinks Hollands alone, and in a church-yard, on such a night as
this?’ said the goblin.

“‘Gabriel Grub! Gabriel Grub!’ exclaimed the wild voices again.

“The goblin leered maliciously at the terrified sexton, and then raising
his voice, exclaimed—

“‘And who, then, is our fair and lawful prize?’

“To this inquiry the invisible chorus replied, in a strain that sounded
like the voices of many choristers singing to the mighty swell of the
old church organ—a strain that seemed borne to the sexton’s ears upon a
gentle wind, and to die away as its soft breath passed onward—but the
burden of the reply was still the same, ‘Gabriel Grub! Gabriel Grub!’

“The goblin grinned a broader grin than before, as he said, ‘Well,
Gabriel, what do you say to this?’

“The sexton gasped for breath.

“‘What do you think of this, Gabriel?’ said the goblin, kicking up his
feet in the air on either side the tombstone, and looking at the
turned-up points with as much complacency as if he had been
contemplating the most fashionable pair of Wellingtons in all Bond
Street.

“‘It’s—it’s—very curious, Sir,’ replied the sexton, half dead with
fright, ‘very curious, and very pretty, but I think I’ll go back and
finish my work, Sir, if you please.’

“‘Work!’ said the goblin, ‘what work?’

“‘The grave, Sir, making the grave,’ stammered the sexton.

“‘Oh, the grave, eh?’ said the goblin, ‘who makes graves at a time when
all other men are merry, and takes a pleasure in it?’

“Again the mysterious voices replied, ‘Gabriel Grub! Gabriel Grub!’

“‘I’m afraid my friends want you, Gabriel,’ said the goblin, thrusting
his tongue further into his cheek than ever—and a most astonishing
tongue it was—‘I’m afraid my friends want you, Gabriel,’ said the
goblin.

“‘Under favour, Sir,’ replied the horror-struck sexton, ‘I don’t think
they can, Sir; they don’t know me, Sir, I don’t think the gentlemen have
ever seen me, Sir.’

“‘Oh yes they have,’ replied the goblin; ‘we know the man with the sulky
face and the grim scowl, that came down the street to-night, throwing
his evil looks at the children, and grasping his burying spade the
tighter. We know the man that struck the boy in the envious malice of
his heart, because the boy could be merry, and he could not. We know
him, we know him.’

“Here the goblin gave a loud shrill laugh, that the echoes returned
twenty-fold, and throwing his legs up in the air, stood upon his head,
or rather upon the very point of his sugar-loaf hat, on the narrow edge
of the tombstone, from whence he threw a summerset with extraordinary
agility, right to the sexton’s feet, at which he planted himself in the
attitude in which tailors generally sit upon the shop-board.

“‘I—I—am afraid I must leave you, Sir,’ said the sexton, making an
effort to move.

“‘Leave us!’ said the goblin, ‘Gabriel Grub going to leave us. Ho! ho!
ho!’

[Illustration]

“As the goblin laughed, the sexton observed for one instant a brilliant
illumination within the windows of the church, as if the whole building
were lighted up; it disappeared, the organ pealed forth a lively air,
and whole troops of goblins, the very counterpart of the first one,
poured into the church-yard, and began playing at leap-frog with the
tombstones, never stopping for an instant to take breath, but overing
the highest among them, one after the other, with the most marvellous
dexterity. The first goblin was a most astonishing leaper, and none of
the others could come near him; even in the extremity of his terror the
sexton could not help observing, that while his friends were content to
leap over the common-sized gravestones, the first one took the family
vaults, iron railings and all, with as much ease as if they had been so
many street posts.

“At last the game reached to a most exciting pitch; the organ played
quicker and quicker, and the goblins leaped faster and faster, coiling
themselves up, rolling head over heels upon the ground, and bounding
over the tombstones like foot-balls. The sexton’s brain whirled round
with the rapidity of the motion he beheld, and his legs reeled beneath
him, as the spirits flew before his eyes, when the goblin king suddenly
darting towards him, laid his hand upon his collar, and sank with him
through the earth.

“When Gabriel Grub had had time to fetch his breath, which the rapidity
of his descent had for the moment taken away, he found himself in what
appeared to be a large cavern, surrounded on all sides by crowds of
goblins, ugly and grim; in the centre of the room, on an elevated seat,
was stationed his friend of the church-yard; and close beside him stood
Gabriel Grub himself, without the power of motion.

“‘Cold to-night,’ said the king of the goblins, ‘very cold. A glass of
something warm, here.’

“At this command, half a dozen officious goblins, with a perpetual smile
upon their faces, whom Gabriel Grub imagined to be courtiers, on that
account, hastily disappeared, and presently returned with a goblet of
liquid fire, which they presented to the king.

“‘Ah!’ said the goblin, whose cheeks and throat were quite transparent,
as he tossed down the flame, ‘This warms one, indeed: bring a bumper of
the same, for Mr. Grub.’

“It was in vain for the unfortunate sexton to protest that he was not in
the habit of taking anything warm at night; for one of the goblins held
him while another poured the blazing liquid down his throat, and the
whole assembly screeched with laughter as he coughed and choked, and
wiped away the tears which gushed plentifully from his eyes, after
swallowing the burning draught.

“‘And now,’ said the king, fantastically poking the taper corner of his
sugar-loaf hat into the sexton’s eye, and thereby occasioning him the
most exquisite pain—‘And now, show the man of misery and gloom a few of
the pictures from our own great storehouse.’

“As the goblin said this, a thick cloud which obscured the further end
of the cavern, rolled gradually away, and disclosed, apparently at a
great distance, a small and scantily furnished, but neat and clean
apartment. A crowd of little children were gathered round a bright fire,
clinging to their mother’s gown, and gambolling round her chair. The
mother occasionally rose, and drew aside the window-curtain as if to
look for some expected object; a frugal meal was ready spread upon the
table, and an elbow chair was placed near the fire. A knock was heard at
the door: the mother opened it, and the children crowded round her, and
clapped their hands for joy, as their father entered. He was wet and
weary, and shook the snow from his garments, as the children crowded
round him, and seizing his cloak, hat, stick, and gloves, with busy
zeal, ran with them from the room. Then as he sat down to his meal
before the fire, the children climbed about his knee, and the mother sat
by his side, and all seemed happiness and comfort.

“But a change came upon the view, almost imperceptibly. The scene was
altered to a small bed-room, where the fairest and youngest child lay
dying; the roses had fled from his cheek, and the light from his eye;
and even as the sexton looked upon him with an interest he had never
felt or known before, he died. His young brothers and sisters crowded
round his little bed, and seized his tiny hand, so cold and heavy; but
they shrunk back from its touch, and looked with awe on his infant face;
for calm and tranquil as it was, and sleeping in rest and peace as the
beautiful child seemed to be, they saw that he was dead, and they knew
that he was an angel looking down upon, and blessing them, from a bright
and happy Heaven.”

[Illustration]

Again the light cloud passed across the picture, and again the subject
changed. The father and mother were old and helpless now, and the number
of those about them was diminished more than half; but content and
cheerfulness sat on every face, and beamed in every eye, as they crowded
round the fireside, and told and listened to old stories of earlier and
bygone days. Slowly and peacefully the father sank into the grave, and,
soon after, the sharer of all his cares and troubles followed him to a
place of rest and peace. The few, who yet survived them, knelt by their
tomb, and watered the green turf which covered it with their tears; then
rose and turned away, sadly and mournfully, but not with bitter cries,
or despairing lamentations, for they knew that they should one day meet
again; and once more they mixed with the busy world, and their content
and cheerfulness were restored. The cloud settled upon the picture, and
concealed it from the sexton’s view.

“‘What do you think of _that_?’ said the goblin, turning his large face
towards Gabriel Grub.

“Gabriel murmured out something about its being very pretty, and looked
somewhat ashamed, as the goblin bent his fiery eyes upon him.

“‘_You_ a miserable man!’ said the goblin, in a tone of excessive
contempt. ‘You!’ He appeared disposed to add more, but indignation
choked his utterance, so he lifted up one of his very pliable legs, and
flourishing it above his head a little, to insure his aid, administered
a good sound kick to Gabriel Grub; immediately after which, all the
goblins in waiting crowded round the wretched sexton, and kicked him
without mercy, according to the established and invariable custom of
courtiers upon earth, who kick whom royalty kicks, and hug whom royalty
hugs.

“‘Show him some more,’ said the king of the goblins.

“At these words the cloud was again dispelled, and a rich and beautiful
landscape was disclosed to view—there is just such another to this day,
within half a mile of the old abbey town. The sun shone from out the
clear blue sky, the water sparkled beneath his rays, and the trees
looked greener, and the flowers more gay, beneath his cheering
influence. The water rippled on, with a pleasant sound, the trees
rustled in the light wind that murmured among their leaves, the birds
sang upon the boughs, and the lark carolled on high, her welcome to the
morning. Yes, it was morning, the bright, balmy morning of summer; the
minutest leaf, the smallest blade of grass, was instinct with life. The
ant crept forth to her daily toil, the butterfly fluttered and basked in
the warm rays of the sun; myriads of insects spread their transparent
wings, and revelled in their brief but happy existence. Man walked
forth, elated with the scene; and all was brightness and splendour.

“‘_You_ a miserable man!’ said the king of the goblins, in a more
contemptuous tone than before. And again the king of the goblins gave
his leg a flourish; again it descended on the shoulders of the sexton;
and again the attendant goblins imitated the example of their chief.

[Illustration:

  _A rich and beautiful landscape was disclosed to view._
]

“Many a time the cloud went and came, and many a lesson it taught to
Gabriel Grub, who although his shoulders smarted with pain from the
frequent applications of the goblin’s feet thereunto, looked on with an
interest which nothing could diminish. He saw that men who worked hard,
and earned their scanty bread with lives of labour, were cheerful and
happy; and that to the most ignorant, the sweet face of nature was a
never-failing source of cheerfulness and joy. He saw those who had been
delicately nurtured, and tenderly brought up, cheerful under privations,
and superior to suffering, that would have crushed many of a rougher
grain, because they bore within their own bosoms the materials of
happiness, contentment, and peace. He saw that women, the tenderest and
most fragile of all God’s creatures, were the oftenest superior to
sorrow, adversity, and distress; and he saw that it was because they
bore in their own hearts an inexhaustible wellspring of affection and
devotedness. Above all, he saw that men like himself, who snarled at the
mirth and cheerfulness of others, were the foulest weeds on the fair
surface of the earth; and setting all the good of the world against the
evil, he came to the conclusion that it was a very decent and
respectable sort of world after all. No sooner had he formed it, than
the cloud which had closed over the last picture, seemed to settle on
his senses, and lull him to repose. One by one, the goblins faded from
his sight, and as the last one disappeared, he sunk to sleep.”

The day had broken when Gabriel Grub awoke, and found himself lying at
full length on the flat gravestone in the church-yard, with the wicker
bottle lying empty by his side, and his coat, spade, and lantern, all
well whitened by the last night’s frost, scattered on the ground. The
stone on which he had first seen the goblin seated, stood bolt upright
before him, and the grave at which he had worked, the night before, was
not far off. At first he began to doubt the reality of his adventures,
but the acute pain in his shoulders when he attempted to rise, assured
him that the kicking of the goblins was certainly not ideal. He was
staggered again, by observing no traces of footsteps in the snow on
which the goblins had played at leap-frog with the gravestones, but he
speedily accounted for this circumstance when he remembered that being
spirits, they would leave no visible impression behind them. So Gabriel
Grub got on his feet as well as he could, for the pain in his back; and
brushing the frost off his coat, put it on, and turned his face towards
the town.

But he was an altered man, and he could not bear the thought of
returning to a place where his repentance would be scoffed at, and his
reformation disbelieved. He hesitated for a few moments; and then turned
away to wander where he might, and seek his bread elsewhere.

The lantern, the spade, and the wicker bottle, were found that day in
the church-yard. There were a great many speculations about the sexton’s
fate at first, but it was speedily determined that he had been carried
away by the goblins; and there were not wanting some very credible
witnesses who had distinctly seen him whisked through the air on the
back of a chestnut horse blind of one eye, with the hind quarters of a
lion, and the tail of a bear. At length all this was devoutly believed;
and the new sexton used to exhibit to the curious for a trifling
emolument, a good-sized piece of the church weathercock which had been
accidentally kicked off by the aforesaid horse in his aërial flight, and
picked up by himself in the church-yard, a year or two afterwards.

“Unfortunately these stories were somewhat disturbed by the unlooked-for
reappearance of Gabriel Grub himself, some ten years afterwards, a
ragged, contented, rheumatic old man. He told his story to the
clergyman, and also to the mayor; and in course of time it began to be
received as a matter of history, in which form it has continued down to
this very day. The believers in the weathercock tale, having misplaced
their confidence once, were not easily prevailed upon to part with it
again, so they looked as wise as they could, shrugged their shoulders,
touched their foreheads, and murmured something about Gabriel Grub’s
having drunk all the Hollands, and then fallen asleep on the flat
tombstone; and they affected to explain what he supposed he had
witnessed in the goblin’s cavern, by saying that he had seen the world,
and grown wiser. But this opinion, which was by no means a popular one
at any time, gradually died off; and be the matter how it may, as
Gabriel Grub was afflicted with rheumatism to the end of his days, this
story has at least one moral, if it teach no better one—and that is,
that if a man turns sulky and drinks by himself at Christmas time, he
may make up his mind to be not a bit the better for it, let the spirits
be ever so good, or let them be even as many degrees beyond proof, as
those which Gabriel Grub saw, in the goblin’s cavern.”




                              CHAPTER III

  HOW THE PICKWICKIANS MADE AND CULTIVATED THE ACQUAINTANCE OF A COUPLE
      OF NICE YOUNG MEN BELONGING TO ONE OF THE LIBERAL PROFESSIONS; HOW
      THEY DISPORTED THEMSELVES ON THE ICE; AND HOW THEIR VISIT CAME TO
      A CONCLUSION.


“Well, Sam,” said Mr. Pickwick as that favoured servitor entered his
bed-chamber with his warm water, on the morning of Christmas Day, “Still
frosty?”

“Water in the wash-hand basin’s a mask o’ ice, Sir,” responded Sam.

“Severe weather, Sam,” observed Mr. Pickwick.

“Fine time for them as is well wropped up, as the Polar Bear said to
himself, ven he was practising his skaiting,” replied Mr. Weller.

“I shall be down in a quarter of an hour, Sam,” said Mr. Pickwick,
untying his nightcap.

“Wery good, Sir,” replied Sam. “There’s a couple o’ Sawbones down
stairs.”

“A couple of what!” exclaimed Mr. Pickwick, sitting up in bed.

“A couple o’ Sawbones,” said Sam.

“What’s a Sawbones?” inquired Mr. Pickwick, not quite certain whether it
was a live animal, or something to eat.

“What! don’t you know what a Sawbones is, Sir?” inquired Mr. Weller; “I
thought every body know’d as a Sawbones was a Surgeon.”

“Oh, a Surgeon, eh?” said Mr. Pickwick with a smile.

“Just that Sir,” replied Sam. “These here ones as is below, though,
ain’t reg’lar thoroughbred Sawbones; they’re only in trainin’.”

“In other words they’re Medical Students, I suppose?” said Mr. Pickwick.

Sam Weller nodded assent.

“I am glad of it,” said Mr. Pickwick, casting his nightcap energetically
on the counterpane, “They are fine fellows; very fine fellows, with
judgments matured by observation and reflection; and tastes refined by
reading and study. I am very glad of it.”

“They’re a smokin’ cigars by the kitchen fire,” said Sam.

“Ah!” observed Mr. Pickwick, rubbing his hands, “overflowing with kindly
feelings and animal spirits. Just what I like to see!”

“And one on ’em,” said Sam, not noticing his master’s interruption, “one
on ’em ’s got his legs on the table, and is a drinkin’ brandy neat, vile
the t’other one—him in the barnacles—has got a barrel o’ oysters atween
his knees, vich he’s a openin’ like steam, and as fast as he eats ’em,
he takes a aim vith the shells at young dropsy, who’s a settin’ down
fast asleep, in the chimbley corner.”

“Eccentricities of genius, Sam,” said Mr. Pickwick. “You may retire.”

Sam did retire accordingly; and Mr. Pickwick, at the expiration of the
quarter of an hour, went down to breakfast.

“Here he is at last,” said old Wardle. “Pickwick, this is Miss Allen’s
brother, Mr. Benjamin Allen—Ben we call him, and so may you if you like.
This gentleman is his very particular friend, Mr. ——”

[Illustration]

“Mr. Bob Sawyer,” interposed Mr. Benjamin Allen, whereupon Mr. Bob
Sawyer and Mr. Benjamin Allen laughed in concert.

Mr. Pickwick bowed to Bob Sawyer, and Bob Sawyer bowed to Mr. Pickwick;
Bob and his very particular friend then applied themselves most
assiduously to the eatables before them; and Mr. Pickwick had an
opportunity of glancing at them both.

Mr. Benjamin Allen was a coarse, stout, thickset young man, with black
hair cut rather short, and a white face cut rather long. He was
embellished with spectacles, and wore a white neckerchief. Below his
single-breasted black surtout, which was buttoned up to his chin,
appeared the usual number of pepper-and-salt coloured legs, terminating
in a pair of imperfectly polished boots. Although his coat was short in
the sleeves, it disclosed no vestige of a linen wristband; and although
there was quite enough of his face to admit of the encroachment of a
shirt collar, it was not graced by the smallest approach to that
appendage. He presented altogether rather a mildewy appearance, and
emitted a fragrant odour of full-flavoured Cubas.

Mr. Bob Sawyer, who was habited in a coarse blue coat, which, without
being either greatcoat or surtout, partook of the nature and qualities
of both, had about him that sort of slovenly smartness, and swaggering
gait, which is peculiar to young gentlemen who smoke in the streets by
day, shout and scream in the same by night, call waiters by their
christian names, and do various other acts and deeds of an equally
facetious description. He wore a pair of plaid trousers, and a large
rough double-breasted waistcoat; and out of doors, carried a thick stick
with a big top. He eschewed gloves, and looked, upon the whole,
something like a dissipated Robinson Crusoe.

Such were the two worthies to whom Mr. Pickwick was introduced, as he
took his seat at the breakfast table on Christmas morning.

“Splendid morning, gentlemen,” said Mr. Pickwick.

Mr. Bob Sawyer slightly nodded his assent to the proposition, and asked
Mr. Benjamin Allen for the mustard.

“Have you come far this morning, gentlemen?” inquired Mr. Pickwick.

“Blue Lion at Muggleton,” briefly responded Mr. Allen.

“You should have joined us last night,” said Mr. Pickwick.

“So we should,” replied Bob Sawyer, “but the brandy was too good to
leave in a hurry: wasn’t it, Ben?”

“Certainly,” said Mr. Benjamin Allen; “and the cigars were not bad, or
the pork chops either: were they, Bob?”

“Decidedly not,” said Bob. And the particular friends resumed their
attack upon the breakfast, more freely than before, as if the
recollection of last night’s supper had imparted a new relish to the
meal.

“Peg away, Bob,” said Mr. Allen to his companion, encouragingly.

“So I do,” replied Bob Sawyer. And so, to do him justice, he did.

“Nothing like dissecting, to give one an appetite,” said Mr. Bob Sawyer,
looking round the table.

Mr. Pickwick slightly shuddered.

“By the bye, Bob,” said Mr. Allen, “have you finished that leg yet?”

“Nearly,” replied Sawyer, helping himself to half a fowl as he spoke.
“It’s a very muscular one for a child’s.”

“Is it?” inquired Mr. Allen, carelessly.

“Very,” said Bob Sawyer, with his mouth full.

“I’ve put my name down for an arm, at our place,” said Mr. Allen. “We’re
clubbing for a subject, and the list is nearly full, only we can’t get
hold of any fellow that wants a head. I wish you’d take it.”

“No,” replied Bob Sawyer; “can’t afford expensive luxuries.”

“Nonsense!” said Allen.

“Can’t indeed,” rejoined Bob Sawyer. “I wouldn’t mind a brain, but I
couldn’t stand a whole head.”

“Hush, hush, gentlemen, pray,” said Mr. Pickwick, “I hear the ladies.”

As Mr. Pickwick spoke, the ladies, gallantly escorted by Messrs.
Snodgrass, Winkle, and Tupman, returned from an early walk.

“Lor, Ben!” said Arabella, in a tone which expressed more surprise than
pleasure at the sight of her brother.

“Come to take you home to-morrow,” replied Benjamin.

Mr. Winkle turned pale.

“Don’t you see Bob Sawyer, Arabella?” enquired Mr. Benjamin Allen,
somewhat reproachfully. Arabella gracefully held out her hand, in
acknowledgment of Bob Sawyer’s presence. A thrill of hatred struck to
Mr. Winkle’s heart, as Bob Sawyer inflicted on the proffered hand a
perceptible squeeze.

“Ben, dear!” said Arabella, blushing; “have—have—you been introduced to
Mr. Winkle?”

“I have not been, but I shall be very happy to be, Arabella,” replied
her brother gravely. Here Mr. Allen bowed grimly to Mr. Winkle, while
Mr. Winkle and Mr. Bob Sawyer glanced mutual distrust out of the corners
of their eyes.

The arrival of the two new visitors, and the consequent check upon Mr.
Winkle and the young lady with the fur round her boots, would in all
probability have proved a very unpleasant interruption to the hilarity
of the party, had not the cheerfulness of Mr. Pickwick, and the good
humour of the host, been exerted to the very utmost for the common weal.
Mr. Winkle gradually insinuated himself into the good graces of Mr.
Benjamin Allen, and even joined in a friendly conversation with Mr. Bob
Sawyer; who, enlivened with the brandy, and the breakfast, and the
talking, gradually ripened into a state of extreme facetiousness, and
related with much glee an agreeable anecdote, about the removal of a
tumour on some gentleman’s head, which he illustrated by means of an
oyster-knife and a half-quartern loaf, to the great edification of the
assembled company. Then the whole train went to church, where Mr.
Benjamin Allen fell fast asleep; while Mr. Bob Sawyer abstracted his
thoughts from worldly matters, by the ingenious process of carving his
name on the seat of the pew, in corpulent letters of about four inches
long.

“Now,” said Wardle, after a substantial lunch, with the agreeable items
of strong-beer and cherry-brandy, had been done ample justice to; “what
say you to an hour on the ice? We shall have plenty of time.”

“Capital!” said Mr. Benjamin Allen.

“Prime!” ejaculated Mr. Bob Sawyer.

“You skait, of course, Winkle?” said Wardle.

“Ye—yes; oh, yes;” replied Mr. Winkle. “I—I—am _rather_ out of
practice.”

“Oh, _do_ skait, Mr. Winkle,” said Arabella. “I like to see it _so_
much.”

“Oh, it is _so_ graceful,” said another young lady.

A third young lady said it was elegant, and a fourth expressed her
opinion that it was “swanlike.”

“I should be very happy, I’m sure,” said Mr. Winkle, reddening; “but I
have no skaits.”

This objection was at once overruled. Trundle had got a couple of pair,
and the fat boy announced that there were half a dozen more, down
stairs, whereat Mr. Winkle expressed exquisite delight, and looked
exquisitely uncomfortable.

Old Wardle led the way to a pretty large sheet of ice; and the fat boy
and Mr. Weller, having shovelled and swept away the snow which had
fallen on it during the night, Mr. Bob Sawyer adjusted his skaits with a
dexterity which to Mr. Winkle was perfectly marvellous, and described
circles with his left leg, and cut figures of eight; and inscribed upon
the ice, without once stopping for breath, a great many other pleasant
and astonishing devices, to the excessive satisfaction of Mr. Pickwick,
Mr. Tupman, and the ladies; which reached a pitch of positive
enthusiasm, when old Wardle and Benjamin Allen, assisted by the
aforesaid Bob Sawyer, performed some mystic evolutions, which they
called a reel.

All this time, Mr. Winkle, with his face and hands blue with the cold,
had been forcing a gimlet into the soles of his feet, and putting his
skaits on, with the points behind, and getting the straps into a very
complicated and entangled state, with the assistance of Mr. Snodgrass,
who knew rather less about skaits than a Hindoo. At length, however,
with the assistance of Mr. Weller, the unfortunate skaits were firmly
screwed and buckled on, and Mr. Winkle was raised to his feet.

“Now, then, Sir,” said Sam, in an encouraging tone; “off vith you, and
show ’em how to do it.”

“Stop, Sam, stop,” said Mr. Winkle, trembling violently, and clutching
hold of Sam’s arms with the grasp of a drowning man. “How slippery it
is, Sam!”

“Not an uncommon thing upon ice, Sir,” replied Mr. Weller. “Hold up,
Sir.”

This last observation of Mr. Weller’s bore reference to a demonstration
Mr. Winkle made at the instant, of a frantic desire to throw his feet in
the air, and dash the back of his head on the ice.

“These—these—are very awkward skaits; ain’t they, Sam?” inquired Mr.
Winkle, staggering.

“I’m afeerd there’s orkard gen’lm’n in ’em, Sir,” replied Sam.

“Now, Winkle,” cried Mr. Pickwick, quite unconscious that there was
anything the matter. “Come; the ladies are all anxiety.”

“Yes, yes,” replied Mr. Winkle, with a ghastly smile. “I’m coming.”

[Illustration:

  “_How slippery it is, Sam!_”
]

“Just a goin’ to begin,” said Sam, endeavouring to disengage himself.
“Now, Sir, start off.”

“Stop an instant, Sam,” gasped Mr. Winkle, clinging most affectionately
to Mr. Weller. “I find I’ve got a couple of coats at home, that I don’t
want, Sam. You may have them, Sam.”

“Thankee, Sir,” replied Mr. Weller.

“Never mind touching your hat, Sam,” said Mr. Winkle, hastily. “You
needn’t take your hand away, to do that. I meant to have given you five
shillings this morning for a Christmas box, Sam. I’ll give it you this
afternoon, Sam.”

“You’re wery good, Sir,” replied Mr. Weller.

“Just hold me at first, Sam; will you?” said Mr. Winkle. “There—that’s
right. I shall soon get in the way of it, Sam. Not too fast, Sam; not
too fast.”

Mr. Winkle, stooping forward, with his body half doubled up, was being
assisted over the ice by Mr. Weller, in a very singular and un-swan-like
manner, when Mr. Pickwick most innocently shouted from the opposite
bank—

“Sam!”

“Sir?” said Mr. Weller.

“Here. I want you.”

“Let go, Sir,” said Sam. “Don’t you hear the governor a callin’? Let go,
Sir.”

[Illustration]

With a violent effort, Mr. Weller disengaged himself from the grasp of
the agonized Pickwickian; and, in so doing, administered a considerable
impetus to the unhappy Mr. Winkle. With an accuracy which no degree of
dexterity or practice could have insured, that unfortunate gentleman
bore swiftly down into the centre of the reel, at the very moment when
Mr. Bob Sawyer was performing a flourish of unparalleled beauty. Mr.
Winkle struck wildly against him, and with a loud crash they both fell
heavily down. Mr. Pickwick ran to the spot. Bob Sawyer had risen to his
feet, but Mr. Winkle was far too wise to do anything of the kind in
skaits. He was seated on the ice, making spasmodic efforts to smile; but
anguish was depicted on every lineament of his countenance.

“Are you hurt?” inquired Mr. Benjamin Allen, with great anxiety.

“Not much,” said Mr. Winkle, rubbing his back very hard.

“I wish you’d let me bleed you,” said Mr. Benjamin with great eagerness.

“No, thank you,” replied Mr. Winkle, hurriedly.

“I really think you had better,” said Allen.

“Thank you,” replied Mr. Winkle; “I’d rather not.”

“What do _you_ think, Mr. Pickwick?” inquired Bob Sawyer.

Mr. Pickwick was excited and indignant. He beckoned to Mr. Weller, and
said in a stern voice, “Take his skaits off.”

“No; but really I had scarcely begun,” remonstrated Mr. Winkle.

“Take his skaits off,” repeated Mr. Pickwick firmly.

The command was not to be resisted. Mr. Winkle allowed Sam to obey it,
in silence.

“Lift him up,” said Mr. Pickwick. Sam assisted him to rise.

Mr. Pickwick retired a few paces apart from the bystanders; and,
beckoning his friend to approach, fixed a searching look upon him, and
uttered in a low, but distinct and emphatic tone, these remarkable
words:

“You’re a humbug, Sir.”

“A what!” said Mr. Winkle, starting.

“A humbug, Sir. I will speak plainer, if you wish it. An impostor, Sir.”

With these words, Mr. Pickwick turned slowly on his heel, and rejoined
his friends.

While Mr. Pickwick was delivering himself of the sentiment just
recorded, Mr. Weller and the fat boy, having by their joint endeavours
cut out a slide, were exercising themselves thereupon, in a very
masterly and brilliant manner. Sam Weller, in particular, was displaying
that beautiful feat of fancy sliding which is currently denominated
“knocking at the cobbler’s door,” and which is achieved by skimming over
the ice on one foot, and occasionally giving a two-penny postman’s knock
upon it with the other. It was a good long slide, and there was
something in the motion which Mr. Pickwick, who was very cold with
standing still, could not help envying.

“It looks a nice warm exercise that, doesn’t it?” he enquired of Wardle,
when that gentleman was thoroughly out of breath, by reason of the
indefatigable manner in which he had converted his legs into a pair of
compasses, and drawn complicated problems on the ice.

“Ah, it does, indeed,” replied Wardle. “Do you slide?”

“I used to do so, on the gutters, when I was a boy,” replied Mr.
Pickwick.

“Try it now,” said Wardle.

“Oh, do, please Mr. Pickwick,” cried all the ladies.

“I should be very happy to afford you any amusement,” replied Mr.
Pickwick, “but I haven’t done such a thing these thirty years.”

“Pooh! pooh! nonsense!” said Wardle, dragging off his skaits with the
impetuosity which characterised all his proceedings. “Here; I’ll keep
you company; come along.” And away went the good-tempered old fellow
down the slide, with a rapidity which came very close upon Mr. Weller,
and beat the fat boy all to nothing.

Mr. Pickwick paused, considered, pulled off his gloves and put them in
his hat, took two or three short runs, baulked himself as often, and at
last took another run and went slowly and gravely down the slide, with
his feet about a yard and a quarter apart, amidst the gratified shouts
of all the spectators.

[Illustration:

  _Went slowly and gravely down the slide, with his feet about a yard
    and a quarter apart._
]

“Keep the pot a bilin’, Sir,” said Sam; and down went Wardle again, and
then Mr. Pickwick, and then Sam, and then Mr. Winkle, and then Mr. Bob
Sawyer, and then the fat boy, and then Mr. Snodgrass, following closely
upon each other’s heels, and running after each other with as much
eagerness as if all their future prospects in life depended on their
expedition.

It was the most intensely interesting thing, to observe the manner in
which Mr. Pickwick performed his share in the ceremony: to watch the
torture of anxiety with which he viewed the person behind, gaining upon
him at the imminent hazard of tripping him up: to see him gradually
expend the painful force which he had put on at first, and turn slowly
round on the slide, with his face towards the point from which he had
started: to contemplate the playful smile which mantled on his face when
he had accomplished the distance, and the eagerness with which he turned
round when he had done so, and ran after his predecessor, his black
gaiters tripping pleasantly through the snow, and his eyes beaming
cheerfulness and gladness through his spectacles. And when he was
knocked down (which happened upon the average every third round), it was
the most invigorating sight that can possibly be imagined, to behold him
gather up his hat, gloves, and handkerchief, with a glowing countenance,
and resume his station in the rank, with an ardour and enthusiasm which
nothing could abate.

The sport was at its height, the sliding was at the quickest, the
laughter was at the loudest, when a sharp smart crack was heard. There
was a quick rush towards the bank, a wild scream from the ladies, and a
shout from Mr. Tupman. A large mass of ice disappeared, the water
bubbled up over it, and Mr. Pickwick’s hat, gloves, and handkerchief
were floating on the surface: and this was all of Mr. Pickwick that
anybody could see.

Dismay and anguish were depicted on every countenance; the males turned
pale, and the females fainted; Mr. Snodgrass and Mr. Winkle grasped each
other by the hand, and gazed at the spot where their leader had gone
down, with frenzied eagerness; while Mr. Tupman, by way of rendering the
promptest assistance, and at the same time conveying to any persons who
might be within hearing, the clearest possible notion of the
catastrophe, ran off across the country at his utmost speed, screaming
“Fire!” with all his might and main.

It was at this very moment, when old Wardle and Sam Weller were
approaching the hole with cautious steps, and Mr. Benjamin Allen was
holding a hurried consultation with Mr. Bob Sawyer, on the advisability
of bleeding the company generally, as an improving little bit of
professional practice—it was at this very moment that a face, head, and
shoulders emerged from beneath the water, and disclosed the features and
spectacles of Mr. Pickwick.

“Keep yourself up for an instant—for only one instant,” bawled Mr.
Snodgrass.

“Yes, do; let me implore you—for my sake,” roared Mr. Winkle, deeply
affected. The adjuration was rather unnecessary; the probability being,
that if Mr. Pickwick had declined to keep himself up for anybody else’s
sake, it would have occurred to him that he might as well do so, for his
own.

“Do you feel the bottom there, old fellow?” said Wardle.

“Yes, certainly,” replied Mr. Pickwick, wringing the water from his head
and face, and gasping for breath. “I fell upon my back. I couldn’t get
on my feet at first.”

The clay upon so much of Mr. Pickwick’s coat as was yet visible, bore
testimony to the accuracy of this statement; and as the fears of the
spectators were still further relieved by the fat boy’s suddenly
recollecting that the water was nowhere more than five feet deep,
prodigies of valour were performed to get him out. After a vast quantity
of splashing, and cracking, and struggling, Mr. Pickwick was at length
fairly extricated from his unpleasant position, and once more stood on
dry land.

“Oh, he’ll catch his death of cold,” said Emily.

“Dear old thing!” said Arabella. “Let me wrap this shawl round you, Mr.
Pickwick.”

“Ah, that’s the best thing you can do,” said Wardle; “and when you’ve
got it on, run home as fast as your legs can carry you, and jump into
bed directly.”

A dozen shawls were offered on the instant; and three or four of the
thickest having been selected, Mr. Pickwick was wrapped up, and started
off, under the guidance of Mr. Weller; presenting the singular
phenomenon of an elderly gentleman dripping wet, and without a hat, with
his arms bound down to his sides, skimming over the ground without any
clearly defined purpose, at the rate of six good English miles an hour.

But Mr. Pickwick cared not for appearances in such an extreme case, and
urged on by Sam Weller, he kept at the very top of his speed until he
reached the door of Manor Farm, where Mr. Tupman had arrived some five
minutes before, and had frightened the old lady into palpitations of the
heart, by impressing her with the unalterable conviction that the
kitchen chimney was on fire—a calamity which always presented itself in
the most glowing colours to the old lady’s mind, when anybody about her
evinced the smallest agitation.

Mr. Pickwick paused not an instant until he was snug in bed. Sam Weller
lighted a blazing fire in the room, and took up his dinner; a bowl of
punch was carried up afterwards, and a grand carouse held in honour of
his safety. Old Wardle would not hear of his rising, so they made the
bed the chair, and Mr. Pickwick presided. A second and a third bowl were
ordered in; and when Mr. Pickwick awoke next morning, there was not a
symptom of rheumatism about him, which proves, as Mr. Bob Sawyer very
justly observed, that there is nothing like hot punch in such cases, and
that if ever hot punch did fail to act as a preventive, it was merely
because the patient fell into the vulgar error of not taking enough of
it.

The jovial party broke up next morning. Breakings up are capital things
in our school days, but in after life they are painful enough. Death,
self-interest, and fortune’s changes, are every day breaking up many a
happy group and scattering them far and wide; and the boys and girls
never come back again. We do not mean to say that it was exactly the
case in this particular instance; all we wish to inform the reader is,
that the different members of the party dispersed to their several
homes; that Mr. Pickwick and his friends once more took their seats on
the top of the Muggleton coach; and that Arabella Allen repaired to her
place of destination, wherever it might have been—we dare say Mr. Winkle
knew, but we confess we don’t—under the care and guardianship of her
brother Benjamin, and his most intimate and particular friend, Mr. Bob
Sawyer.

Before they separated, however, that gentleman and Mr. Benjamin Allen
drew Mr. Pickwick aside with an air of some mystery; and Mr. Bob Sawyer
thrusting his forefinger between two of Mr. Pickwick’s ribs, and thereby
displaying his native drollery, and his knowledge of the anatomy of the
human frame, at one and the same time, enquired—

“I say, old boy, where do you hang out?”

Mr. Pickwick replied that he was at present suspended at the George and
Vulture.

“I wish you’d come and see me,” said Bob Sawyer.

“Nothing would give me greater pleasure,” replied Mr. Pickwick.

“There’s my lodgings,” said Mr. Bob Sawyer, producing a card, “Lant
Street, Borough; it’s near Guy’s, and handy for me you know. Little
distance after you’ve passed Saint George’s Church—turns out of the High
Street on the right hand side the way.”

“I shall find it,” said Mr. Pickwick.

“Come on Thursday week, and bring the other chaps with you,” said Mr.
Bob Sawyer, “I’m going to have a few medical fellows that night.”

Mr. Pickwick expressed the pleasure it would afford him to meet the
medical fellows; and after Mr. Bob Sawyer had informed him that he meant
to be very cosey, and that his friend Ben was to be one of the party,
they shook hands and separated.

We feel that in this place we lay ourself open to the enquiry whether
Mr. Winkle was whispering, during this brief conversation, to Arabella
Allen, and if so, what he said; and furthermore, whether Mr. Snodgrass
was conversing apart with Emily Wardle, and if so, what _he_ said. To
this, we reply, that whatever they might have said to the ladies, they
said nothing at all to Mr. Pickwick or Mr. Tupman for eight-and-twenty
miles, and that they sighed very often, refused ale and brandy, and
looked gloomy. If our observant lady readers can deduce any satisfactory
inferences from these facts, we beg them by all means to do so.

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 2. Anachronistic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings retained as
      printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.





End of Project Gutenberg's Mr. Pickwick's Christmas, by Charles Dickens

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MR. PICKWICK'S CHRISTMAS ***

***** This file should be named 61193-0.txt or 61193-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/1/9/61193/

Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

